# 7 INFINITE POSSIBILITIES


Перше видання цієї книги мало назву “Гід по нескінченних суксуальних можливостях.” Now that we’re older and a little bit wiser, even that sweeping statement seems a bit limiting: sluthood means infinite possibilities of all kinds, not just the sexual. If you think a “celibate slut” is a contradiction in terms, we have a few surprises in store for you: sluthood lives in the brain, not between the legs, and can fit comfortably and joyously into whatever consensual sexual and relationship pattern you choose.

## Асексуальність і целібат

Folks who say no thanks to sex are becoming an increasingly visible minority. _Asexuality_ refers to people who don’t experience sexual attraction, and _celibacy_ refers to those who feel attraction but prefer not to act on it. We think that any kind of sexual freedom must include the freedom to _not_ have sex, without being pestered or **pathologized**.

Asexuality is considered a sexual orientation. Some asexuals have sexual feelings that they may prefer to express by having sex with themselves only; others do not experience sexual feelings at all. Some are willing to share sex with a partner to give that partner pleasure; others prefer to avoid it altogether. Some enjoy nongenital forms of eroticism such as BDSM, tantra, or role-playing; others prefer to steer clear of the whole idea.

Celibacy, on the other hand, is a choice, one that may offer a way to focus on emotional, intellectual, or spiritual concerns. People for whom sex or relationships have caused problems may choose a period of celibacy as a pathway toward self-examination: “What kind of person am I when I’m being me just for myself?”

Some people are celibate, but not by choice: people who are incarcerated, ill or disabled, geographically isolated, or socially unskilled may have trouble finding partners. Others are celibate simply because they do not, for whatever reason, feel like being sociable or sexual for a while, or perhaps for good.

We do not see “celibate slut” or “asexual slut” as in any way a contradiction in terms. There are infinite ways of relating to other people—romantically, intimately, domestically, and more—and if you’ve opened your life and heart to as many of those ways as possible, you’re one of us.

## Платонічні стосунки, або ж дружба

One friend of ours drives us nuts by moaning, “I don’t have a relationship…just all these _friends!_ ” We have news for him, and for you: friendship _is_ a relationship, an important one that offers tremendous opportunities for the things we need most out of our relationships: intimacy, companionship, support in times of trouble, and more.

We are amused by sluthood-skeptics who are appalled by the idea of loving more than one person…and who nonetheless have a best friend, someone with whom they share their deepest secrets, who may in fact be as important a part of their lives as their spouse or lover. If you have a lover and a best friend who are not the same person, you’re already practicing many of the skills of sluthood as you manage each of their needs for intimacy, time, and affection.

## Секс по дружбі

If one of those good, intimate friends becomes your lover…what then? Will it ruin the friendship? Will it lead to something more, something that threatens another part of your life? These are the concerns of many people encountering the possibilities of friendly sex for the first time.

The cultural ban on having sex with your friends is an inevitable offshoot of a societal belief that the only acceptable reason to have sex is to lead to a monogamous, marriage-like relationship. We believe, on the other hand, that friendship is an excellent reason to have sex, and that sex is an excellent way to maintain a friendship.

How do you learn to share intimacy without falling in love? We would propose that we _do_ love our friends, whether or not we have sex with them: these individuals are our family, often more permanent in our lives than marriages. With practice, we can develop an intimacy based on warmth and mutual respect, much freer than desperation, neediness, or the blind insanity of falling in love—that’s why the relationships between “friends with benefits” are so immensely valuable. When we acknowledge the love and respect and appreciation that we share with lovers we would never marry, sexual friendships can become not only possible but preferred. So while you’re worrying that your sexual desire could cost you your best friend, the more experienced slut could be wondering why you are the only friend they’ve never fucked.

> “We believe that friendship is an excellent reason to have sex, and that sex is an excellent way to maintain a friendship.”

Dossie, when she was first a feminist, vowed to remain unpartnered for five years to find out who she might be when she was not trying to be somebody’s “old lady.” She had many wonderful relationships during those years, a rainbow of intimacies, including the sharing of childrearing and households and fixing cars and, of course, lots of lovely sex and affection. She decided that if she made sure to be affectionate, to let people know what she loved about them, that most would find a way to be comfortable with her, and it worked. Her quest helped her discover new ways of being in the world as a woman and as a sexual human being—the foundation of who she is and what she teaches today.

Similarly, some people limit their intimacy to one or two people in their lives, and it can feel risky to expand your sense of intimate connection with more people. Nothing increases intimacy better than shared vulnerabilities, and sometimes that can feel scary. But when you take the risk of sharing a scary feeling, you actually deepen your connection and often get responses in kind, like “I feel scared, too!” or “I can understand that; please tell me more.” There is no reason why any relationship in our lives can’t be blessed with intimacy.

Each relationship seeks its own level, or will if you let it. Like water, you and whatever person has caught your fancy can flow together as long as you let it happen in the way that is fitting to you both.

## Relationship Anarchy

One of the newer terms in the poly lexicon, **relationship anarchy**, refers to a lifestyle decision not to take one partner as a “primary” and others as “secondaries” (or any hierarchy of that kind) but instead to maintain each relationship as separate and to make as few rules as possible.

Anarchists seek to avoid hierarchies in all areas of life, an idealistic goal that can be more complicated than it sounds. We benefit from questioning boundaries and structures that our society may take for granted, so anarchists are a rich source of exploring “outside the box” and looking at what life and love might be like when we avoid imposing structure on it.

Relationship anarchy generally values freedom above commitment, so its practitioners prefer to minimize agreements and other promises regarding sexual or romantic behavior. This does not, of course, mean everyone has free rein to be awful—even the wildest anarchist might need some basic understanding regarding safer sex, the absence of physical or emotional abuse, and so on, to feel safe enough to engage with any given partner. And relationship anarchists still need to hone their skills at intimacy, connection, and expressing affection. But if you’re the kind of person who chafes under authority and feels rules are made to be broken, you might find a good fit as a relationship anarchist.

## Living Single

For some sluts, being single may be a temporary condition between partners, a recommended period of healing from a recent breakup, or a chosen lifestyle for the long term. Being single is a good way to get to know who you are when you are not trying to fit as the other half of somebody else; learning to enjoy living with yourself gives you a lot to share with partners when you choose to connect. Single sluthood has its own joys and challenges, which is why we’re going to deal with it at much greater length later in this book.

“Being single is a good way to get to know who you are when you are not trying to fit as the other half of somebody else.”

In monogamy-centrist culture, singles too often journey in the Land of One-Night Stands, in which you go home with a pickup and share some hot sex, and then, the next morning, you look at each other and decide whether the relationship has life-partner potential. If not, you leave, with much embarrassment, and the unspoken rule is that you will never be comfortable with that weighed-in-the-balance-and-found-wanting person again. Sex as audition happens because most people have no script for sexual intimacy in the mid-range between complete stranger and total commitment.

Single sluts, though, can play the field in a variety of ways. One distinguishing dimension is how separate you keep your lovers. So one form of sluttery for the single involves multiple partners who have no interaction, indeed, no information, about each other; this avoids complications at the cost of limiting certain kinds of intimacy, such as opportunities for mutual support and the development of community.

Or you may choose to introduce your lovers to each other, perhaps over Sunday brunch. This may sound wild or impossible or like a script for disaster, but don’t knock it if you haven’t tried it. Your lovers have a lot in common—you, for example—and they may very well like each other.

If you are a single person in any open sexual lifestyle, you must pay attention to how you are getting your sexual, emotional, and social needs met. You can do this in an infinite variety of ways. The important thing is to be _aware_ of your needs and wants so you can go about getting them met with full consciousness. If you pretend that you have no needs for sex, affection, or emotional support, you are lying to yourself, and you will wind up trying to get your needs met by indirect methods that won’t work very well. People who do this often get called _manipulative_ or _passive-aggressive_ —terms, in our opinion, for people who have not figured out how to get their needs met in a straightforward manner.

When you figure out what you want and ask for it, you’ll be surprised how often the answer is yes. Think how relieved you might feel when someone asks you for support or a hug or otherwise lets you know how to please them. Think of how competent and just plain good you feel when you can truly help another person, whether it’s by offering a shoulder to cry on or that just-right stimulation that leads to the perfect orgasm. Give your friends the opportunity to feel good by fulfilling you, too.

## “Monogamish”

Coined by the sex columnist Dan Savage in 2011, the term **monogamish** has caught on with a rapidity that makes us think perhaps such a word has been needed for a long time.

Monogamish is an agreement between both halves of a couple that their bond takes precedence over any outside connections, but that the occasional brief fling is acceptable and perhaps even desirable for keeping the home fires burning. Many monogamish couples take mutually agreed upon third parties into their beds from time to time or agree together on an “anything goes” night for one-time fun. We’ve heard of more than a few monogamous couples who playfully make “one time” exceptions for a celebrity crush: “Okay, if you can get Dan Savage into bed with you, you go right ahead”—which we guess could be fantasy monogamishness.

For the many couples who are titillated by the thought of an occasional outside dalliance but not ready to make the full jump into polyamory, a monogamish agreement is the toe you can dip in the water to test the temperature.

## Partnerships

There are multiple forms of open relationship for the partnered, including serial monogamy, in which one’s various partners are separated in time, and the ever-popular nonconsensual nonmonogamy, otherwise known as cheating. We can think of these lifestyles as unconscious free love, but your authors feel both freer and safer when we love right out in the open.

It is axiomatic that open relationships work best when a couple or established group takes care of each other and their relationship first, before they include others in their dynamic. So the slut partnership needs to be willing to do the work we will describe later in this book to communicate well and to handle jealousy, insecurity, and territoriality with the highest consciousness. People in such partnerships need to know and communicate their boundaries, to make and keep agreements, and to respect both each other’s boundaries and the boundaries they’ve set for their relationships. Couples and groups also need to make sure to nourish their own connection to keep it happy, healthy, and fulfilling.

Partnerships can have a secondary relationship outside of the primary or a number of lovers that don’t get ranked in any hierarchy. Relationships vary in how close or distant they are emotionally and physically and in how much contact is involved. Some may be short term, while others may last for years or even a lifetime; some may involve getting together twice a week, others twice a year.

People new to polyamory tend to spend a lot of energy defining their boundaries. They usually focus more at first on what they _don’t_ want their partner to do—the activities that make them feel, for some reason, unsafe or downright terrified—than on their actual desires. Setting these limits is, for many people, a necessary first step into the disorienting world of sluthood. However, as partnerships become more sophisticated at operating the boundaries of their relationship, they tend to focus more on what they _would_ enjoy and then strategize about how they can make it safe. How to create and follow this learning curve will be covered in more detail in chapter 18, “Opening an Existing Relationship.”

One woman of our acquaintance has a lifelong lifestyle of having two primary partners, one man and one woman, with her other partners and her primaries’ other partners forming a huge network. Her relationships historically have lasted many years, through raising children and grandchildren, and her exes are still active members of her extended family.

In some open relationships, each partner seeks out other partners pretty much separately, often making agreements about who gets to cruise which club when, or taking care to avoid running into each other on the Internet or in personal ads. They may talk about their adventures with each other and occasionally introduce play partners to their live-in lovers.

Others seek out a close match with another couple so they can play, either as a foursome or by switching partners, with people they have met and chosen together. Many polyamorous couples make a fine lifestyle out of seeking relationships with couples who are most like them, who share their values and boundaries. Such pairings of pairs can become lifelong attachments and generate both hot sex and true family interconnectedness.

And others allow their relationships to settle where they do and to change over time. Sometimes we have reconnected with an old lover after quite a few years and found a fit like an old glove.

## Hierarchies and Alternatives

Many polyfolk like to use a hierarchical terminology to define their relationships: the people they live with in a marriage-like arrangement are _primaries_, the people they love but don’t live with are _secondaries_, the people they enjoy spending (often sexual) time with, perhaps not as often or with less commitment, are _tertiaries_. Other language used for couplings are _life partner_ and the rather sweet _nesting partner_.

While this terminology is pervasive, and sometimes useful as a shorthand, we have some concerns about a system that inherently ranks the importance of the people in our lives. Janet says, “E is my life partner and Dossie is my coauthor. If I’m buying a house, E’s the most important; if I’m writing a book, Dossie is. Each of them has their own place in my life—why do I have to rank them?”

## More Than Two

People can make commitments to each other in numbers greater than two. The level of commitment may vary, as when an existing couple makes a commitment to a third partner or even a fourth. Relationships that add, and inevitably also subtract, members over time tend to form very complex structures, with new configurations of family roles that they generally invent by trial and error. Individuals in groups that come together as a threesome or foursome may find their roles within the family developing, growing, and changing over time: the person who feels like the “mother” of the group this year might well transition to “kid” or “dad” over time or with each different partner.

Triads allow three partners, in any combination of genders, to form a family unit. Some people grow into triadic or quadratic families as they attain deepening involvement with one or more members who started as outside lovers. Others actively seek members for group marriages to fulfill their ideal of the kind of family they want to live in. We have heard of people who identify as “trisexual” because they are so strongly attuned to the idea of living and loving as part of a threesome.

> “Transcend competitiveness: there’s enough of everything for everybody.”

Balancing triads can be challenging: in any ménage à trois there are actually three couples, A & B, B & C, and C & A, and each of these relationships will be different. In a triad, as with the siblings of a family, all the relationships will not be at the same level at the same time; we’ve heard of lengthy arguments over which member of a triad should ride in the back seat of the car. In all forms of ethical sluthood, but perhaps especially in triads, it is vital to find ways to transcend competitiveness: there’s enough of everything for everybody.

## Public Sex

Sluts in any kind of relationship may enjoy group sex. Environments for orgies, party houses, sex clubs, swing houses, bathhouses, and glory holes are available in many major cities in a variety of forms and for nearly all sexual preferences. We will tell you all about them in chapter 24. A group sex environment may constitute a safe field of exploration for a monogamish couple. They can attend parties together or separately, cruise singly or as a twosome, meet each other’s friends, and play with a variety of people, all the while maintaining whatever connection with each other they feel good about. In this way, sex outside the primary relationship is defined by the specific environment in which it happens.

Group sex environments often develop their own families, people who participate regularly and get to know each other and may share other activities, like giant Thanksgiving dinners. The film _Shortbus_ portrays the varied and fascinating individuals who form a chosen family through their friendly neighborhood sex club.

## Chosen Family

_Circle_ is a word we use for a set of connections among a group of people that actually might look more like a constellation, with some people near the hub and connected to several others and others near the outside and connected to only one or two and, perhaps, part of another constellation as well. These constellations may be casual or may become extended families, with provisions for raising children, making a living, taking care of the sick or aging, and purchasing property.

Dr. James Ramey, in his wonderful book _Intimate Friendships_, documented his observations that nonmonogamy could facilitate the formation of what he described as kinship networks, communities bound together by the intimacies of their sexual connections, perhaps serving the same functions as villages did in a smaller world. Some of us have taken to referring to our groupings as _tribes_.

Circles of sexual friends are common—some people call these friends “fuck buddies.” Such circles may be open and welcome new members, typically brought in by other members. When you are part of such a circle, new lovers of any member are potential friends and family members of your own, so the focus changes from competition and exclusivity to a sense of inclusion and welcome, often very warm indeed.

Other circles are closed, with new members welcome only by agreement with existing members. Closed circles are sometimes set up as a strategy for safety from HIV infection and other sexually transmitted conditions and also to deal with alienation in an overpopulated world. In a closed circle, the notion is that you can play with anyone in the circle (all of whom have made agreements about safer sex and are all perhaps of known STI status), but you don’t have sex with anyone outside the group. Thus you get to play around with a variety of relationships and still stay in a limited field. Such lifestyles are sometimes known as **polyfidelity**.

These are just a few of the ways in which sluts have chosen to organize their lives and loves. You get to choose one or several or invent one of your own. We think that relationship structures should be designed to fit the people in them rather than people chosen to fit some abstract ideal of the perfect relationship. There’s no right or wrong way to do this as long as everyone’s having fun and getting their needs met.

---
## In Praise of Monogamy

Although monogamy isn’t the choice of either of your authors, we nevertheless applaud it as one of the infinite possibilities available to the thoughtful slut—one that offers a different set of risks and rewards than other relationships but an excellent choice for many, either temporarily or permanently.

A friend of ours (born only a few years before the initial publication of this book, who first read it when she was scandalously young) recently said, “I was talking to a friend of mine who’s monogamous, and it seemed like some odd sort of BDSM contract: an agreement to share their sexuality only with one person. Not _wrong_, of course, not if both people agree to it. Just…weird.”

And we think that if you can’t understand why anyone would choose monogamy, you could think of it as a contract, just like the one a dominant/ submissive couple might sign to solidify their agreements with one another, as valid as any other consensual and well-informed relationship choice.

What are the advantages of monogamy? We think they might include:

• A way to focus your energy on just one partner instead of spreading it over several

• A way to keep the decks cleared for other major responsibilities (a new baby, graduate school, a demanding career…)

• A commitment to stretch your sexual interests to meet your partner’s desires rather than sending those desires outside the relationship—or the reverse, to make a willing sacrifice of some personal desires toward the well-being of the relationship

• The simplicity of maintaining a straightforward calendar and not having to accommodate anyone’s needs beyond yours, your partner’s, and those of any dependents you might care for

And of course, there’s no law saying that once you choose monogamy (or, for that matter, any other relationship style), you must stick to it forever and ever. Janet thinks that in a world where all relationship choices were available without judgment or social sanction, many people might choose a pattern of relationship styles that corresponded to their life changes: sluttery during early adulthood, monogamy during the frantic years of career building and childrearing, then some sort of polyamory (either within the original couple or as a single person, post-breakup) during middle age, and at last a gentle and loving wind down into affectionate celibacy. Although we have heard of some remarkably slutty retirement communities.

The only objection we have to monogamy is not to the practice itself but to the widespread belief that it’s your only moral choice. By this point in the book, we hope you’ve figured out that it is only one of myriad choices and that you get to decide for yourself (with input from your partners) what relationship style will work best for you.

If you think it over carefully and decide you want monogamy, you’ll still need most if not all of the skills you’re learning about in this book: jealousy, time management issues, the natural ebb and flow of desire, and all the rest of it happen to monogamists, too. So please read on.


---