15 ROADMAPS THROUGH JEALOUSY
=========================

> Let jealousy be your teacher. Jealousy can lead you to the very places where you most need healing. It can be your guide into your own dark side and show you the way to total self-realization. Jealousy can teach you how to live in peace with yourself and with the whole world if you let it.
> 
> —DEBORAH ANAPOL, _Love without Limits_

For many people, the biggest obstacle to free love is the emotion we call jealousy.

Jealousy feels really rotten, and most of us will go to great lengths to avoid feeling it. However, your authors believe that most people take the destructive power of jealousy way too much for granted, that they give their jealousy far more power than it deserves. After many years of living free and dealing successfully with jealousy, we tend to forget that we live in a culture that considers it acceptable to divorce or even murder a sexually explorative partner who has committed the unthinkable crime of arousing jealousy in us.

Let us point out that monogamy is not a cure for jealousy. We have all had experiences of being ferociously jealous of work that keeps our partner away or distracted, of our lover’s decision to cruise the Internet instead of our bodies, or of Monday (and Tuesday and Wednesday) Night Football. Jealousy is not exclusive to sluts—it’s an emotion we all have to deal with.

“Let us point out that monogamy is not a cure for jealousy.”

Many people believe that sexual territoriality is a natural part of individual and social evolution. More recent theories suggest that it may date from about eight thousand years ago, when humans shifted from being hunting and gathering nomads to landed farmers, making the long-term control of land, families, and all the means of production much more important. If you believe that jealousy is natural rather than a social construct, it’s easy to use it as justification to go berserk and stop being a sane, responsible, and ethical human being.

Your authors don’t think it matters whether jealousy derives from nature or nurture or both. What matters is that we know from experience that we can change it.

Here is a story from Dossie’s life about the struggle to cope with jealousy:

> My lover is late coming home. I hope she is all right—this morning she left in tears. Last night we both cried until very late. I hope she will not be too angry with me, or then again, her anger might be easier to bear than her pain. Last night I thought my heart would break from feeling her pain.
> 
> And it’s my fault, my choice, my responsibility. I am asking my lover to go through the fire for reasons most of the rest of the world consider frivolous if not downright reprehensible. I cannot, will not, be monogamous.
> 
> More than four decades ago, I left my daughter’s violent father, fighting my way out the door, bruised and pregnant, promising I would call my parents for money, lying. After I escaped Joe, he threatened murder—one time he set fires around the house he thought we were still in. After I left, I decided he was right—I am a slut, I want to be a slut, I will never promise monogamy again. I will never be a piece of property again, no matter how valuable that property is considered. Joe made a feminist of me—a feminist slut.
> 
> My lover is back. She brought me a flower. She still doesn’t want a hug. She feels her house has been invaded by alien energy. I was very careful to clean up, all is very tidy, dinner is ready, appeasement and placation, I’ll do anything not to feel so awful.
> 
> Why did I insist on doing this? My coauthor and I have been patiently waiting to resume this part of our relationship when my newfound and most beloved partner was ready. She has already conquered the terrors of group sex—tomorrow we will have another couple over for dinner and my birthday spanking, which she herself arranged with no egging on from me. Within the last year she has had more new sexual experiences than she’d had in the previous forty-eight years and has taken to it all like a duck to water.
> 
> Except her lover having a date with one other person. She hates feeling left out and resents that we are doing it in our home this time, not neutral territory. Maybe this was a mistake. Maybe I make a lot of mistakes.
> 
> My friends and lovers have welcomed her into the family with open arms. Lovers often form kinship networks from their sexual connections, and customs, even sort of a culture, have begun to emerge. And so it is customary, in my brand-new culture, for one’s lovers to welcome a new lover, not as competition but as an addition to the community. But this is not her culture.
> 
> My lover is ready to talk now. She is seriously pissed. She resents me for every miserable terrified thought she has had today, she is furious that I would subject her to the unprotected experience of her own feelings, and that’s not what she said, that’s my interpretation. And that’s not what I said either—this was no time to get uppity about clean boundaries and the importance of owning your own feelings. I listened. This time I listened, without interrupting, trying only to let her know that I love her, I feel her pain, I am here for her. She is furious with me, and I am not giving myself permission to defend myself, and I hurt.
> 
> This story has no tidy ending—we talked for hours, or maybe I listened, and I heard how difficult it was for her, how she felt invaded, how she feared that my other lover would not like her, how she felt attacked by her and me both, how very much she feared I was abandoning her. We came to no pat little answers that make good stories for books—we just poured out anguish, and went to sleep exhausted, and went on loving each other and working on this issue as best we could.

It’s been twenty years since Dossie wrote this story, and she is no longer with this lover. The relationship ended for many reasons, none of them particularly about jealousy. We are including this story because we think it’s important that our readers know that even accomplished sluts struggle with pain, miscommunication, mismatched desires, anger, and, yes, jealousy.

What Is Jealousy?

We cannot ask this question too often. What is jealousy to you? Does jealousy really exist, and is it what we think it is? When we choose to confront the feeling of jealousy rather than run away from it, we can see more clearly what jealousy truly is for each of us. Jealousy is not a single emotion. It can show up as grief or rage, hatred or self-loathing—_jealousy_ is an umbrella word that covers the wide range of emotions we might feel when our partners make sexual connection with somebody else.

Jealousy may be an expression of insecurity, fear of rejection, fear of abandonment, or feeling left out, not good enough, inadequate, or awful. Your jealousy may be based in territoriality or in competitiveness or in some other emotion that’s clamoring to be heard under the jealous racket in your brain. Sometimes it may show up as blind screaming rage—and being blind makes it very difficult to see.

Dossie, when she first started thinking about and challenging her jealousy, felt an almost intolerable sense of insecurity, along the lines of, “Nobody will ever love me because something is wrong with me and I’m unlovable.” She discovered this about herself in the early years of feminism, so it fit perfectly with her feminist explorations to go to work on her self-esteem and build a foundation of security that didn’t need to be granted by another person and that no one else could take away. You can probably figure out how valuable a lesson this was and how many more uses she has found for feeling secure within herself. Thank you, jealousy—without this lesson she wouldn’t be confident enough to be writing this book.

If you experience your jealousy as insensate rage, then you might want to learn about how other people are dealing successfully with anger. You could read something about anger, to discover how other people are thinking about it and working with it. Perhaps you can take a course in anger management. Maybe you can come to terms with your anger. Maybe you can get to a place where you and your lovers need never fear your anger again. Wouldn’t that be worth working on?

Many people find forms of jealousy in themselves that are actually pretty easy to deal with—nagging doubts, bits of nervousness about performance or body image. Others find themselves falling into a whirlpool of terror or grief, difficult even to look at, much less to tease apart into separate feelings like fear of abandonment or loss or rejection. Why do we sometimes feel this way? Dossie the therapist has a theory about this, based not only on her own experience but also that of many clients she has worked with on these issues.

Jealousy is often the mask worn by the most difficult inner conflict you have going on right now, a conflict that’s crying out to be resolved and you don’t even know it. Because it’s rooted so deeply, it can be incredibly difficult to stay conscious when jealousy peeks over the horizon: we twist and turn and writhe in our attempts not to feel it. This is when your emotions are most likely to bring you to grief—when you believe that you need to avoid feeling them at any cost.

One way to not feel a feeling is to project it onto your partner. Projection is a psychological defense that involves trying to move a painful feeling outside yourself by running your emotional movie on someone else, as if that person were a screen for your fears and fantasies. It may be that this is the only real definition of jealousy: it’s the experience of projecting one’s uncomfortable feelings onto one’s partner.

But here’s some good news. If you recognize yourself in any of this, then some part of you has decided that you are strong enough to acknowledge the underlying emotion, and that means you’re in an excellent position to do some healing right now. Use your jealousy as a signpost: “Work on this feeling!” Take a class, join a group, find a good therapist, start practicing meditation—go to work on yourself. You could get a whole lot of bang for your buck if you do the work that’s presenting itself now: heal old wounds, open up new possibilities, gain health and freedom from fear…and somewhere in there, almost as a bonus, you get to grasp your sexual freedom as well.

Sometimes what we perceive as jealousy is actually something else. Think through the details of how jealousy works in you. What bothers you the most? Is it that you _don’t_ want your partner to do those things with someone else or that you _do_ want your partner to do them with you? Jealousy might actually be envy, and envy is often very easy to fix: why not make a date with your lover to do what you have just discovered you are missing?

Sometimes jealousy is rooted in feelings of grief and loss, which can be harder to interpret. We have been taught by our culture that when our partner has sex with another, we have lost something. Not to sound dumb, but we are confused. When our partners come home from hot dates, often they are excited and turned on and have some new ideas they would like to try out at home. We fail to see what we lose in this situation.

Or the sense of loss you feel might be the loss of an ideal, a picture you have been holding in your head of what a perfect relationship might look like. It may be helpful to remember that all relationships change through time: people’s needs and desires shift according to age and circumstance, and the most successful long-term relationships are the ones with enough flexibility to redefine themselves over and over again through the years.

Occasionally, our discomfort means that we are becoming aware on an intuitive level that our partner is moving away from us. That does happen. The fact that supposedly monogamous people everywhere often leave one partner for what they perceive as greener grass with another is not much consolation when it happens to you.

We watched a friend of ours go through feelings of deep grief and loss when they perceived that their partner’s lover was trying to abscond with their partner. In this case, their pain threw a spotlight on some dishonesty and manipulation on the part of the third party and gave the partner the strength to break off from the outside lover and to find other lovers who had greater respect for their primary bond. On the other hand, this scenario might just as easily have ended in a breakup; we’ll talk more about breakups, and dealing with them ethically with care for your own and your partner’s feelings, in chapter 22, “The Ebb and Flow of Relationships.”

Jealousy might also be associated with feelings of competitiveness and wanting to be number one. There’s a reason there is no Olympics of sex: sexual achievement is not measurable. We cannot rank each and every one of us on some hierarchical ladder of who is or is not the most desirable or the better fuck. If you find out about something that you would like to add to your own repertoire, you can certainly learn to do it without wasting time trashing yourself for not already having known how.

Fear of being sexually inadequate can add up to a very deep and secret wound. But allow us to reassure you that eventually, when you succeed in establishing the lifestyle you are dreaming about, you will be so familiar with so many different individuals’ ways of expressing sexuality that you will no longer have to wonder how your sexuality compares to another’s; you’ll know from direct experience. Great lovers are made, not born. You can learn from your lovers, and your lovers’ lovers, and your lovers’ lovers’ lovers, to be the sexual superstar you would like to be.

EXERCISE: HOW DO YOU EXPERIENCE JEALOUSY?

Set aside some time for introspection. Remember some times when you felt jealous, and write about how that felt. You may find your mind preoccupied with thoughts about what those other people were doing. It may take a little patience to go back to your own feelings: rage, grief, despair, desperation, anxiety; feelings of being lost, ugly, lonely, worthless; whatever other feelings are particular to how you experience jealousy. We are often tempted to accuse ourselves about horrid feelings, as if we needed some sort of proper justification for feeling lousy. Try having some compassion for yourself when you feel so bad.

What is your story about jealousy? Do you believe it or not? How do you see yourself when you feel jealous?

Unlearning Jealousy

Changing the way you experience a feeling takes time, so expect a gradual process, learning as you go, by trial and error. And there will be trials, and you will make errors.

Start by giving yourself permission to learn. Allow yourself to not know what you don’t know, to be ignorant: Buddhists call this “beginner’s mind.” You must allow yourself to make mistakes; you have no choice. So reassure yourself: there is no graceful way to unlearn jealousy. It’s like learning to skate—you have to fall down and make a fool of yourself a few times before you become as graceful as a swan.

The challenge comes in learning to establish within yourself a strong foundation of safety in your relationship that is not dependent on sexual exclusivity. This difficult work is part of the larger question of how to grasp your personal power and learn to understand and love yourself without another person to validate you. You become free to give and receive validation, not from need or obligation, but from love and caring. We suggest most strongly that you put some effort into learning to validate yourself: you’re worth it.

Many people find that as they develop their polyamorous families, they actually get validation from lots and lots of people and thus become less dependent on one partner’s approval. Their needs and their sources of nourishment get spread out over a wider territory.

Disempowering Your Jealousy

Jealousy is not a cancer that you can cut out. It is a part of you, a way that you express fear and hurt. What you can do is change the way you experience jealousy and learn to deal with it as you learn to deal with any emotion: work with it until it becomes, not overwhelming and not exactly pleasant, but tolerable—a warm summer shower rather than a typhoon.

One woman we talked to had some very good ideas about what you can do about jealousy:

> I notice that jealousy comes and goes, depending on how good I feel about myself. When I’m not taking care of getting what I want, it’s easy to get jealous and think that someone else is getting what I am not. I need to remember that it’s my job to get my needs met. I feel the jealousy, but I’m not willing to act on it, so it mostly goes away.

Once you have made a commitment to refuse to act on your jealousy, you become free to start reducing the amount of power you let it have over you. One way to do this is simply by allowing yourself to feel it. Just feel it. It will hurt, and you will feel frightened and confused, but if you sit still and listen to yourself with compassion and support for the scared child inside, the first thing you will learn is that the experience of jealousy is survivable.

A large part of our difficulties with jealousy comes from our attempts to avoid feeling a scary or painful emotion. Perhaps long ago when we were children, truly powerless in the world and with a very limited set of tools for dealing with our emotions, we felt something scary and told ourselves, “I will never feel this again; it’s too awful. I’ll die. I’ll kill myself.” So we stick the feeling, and the event that inspired it, into something like a pot, and we put the lid on good and tight. As the years go by, whenever something comes along that reminds us of what’s in the pot, that rattles the lid a little, we push down on that lid—we may not even remember why. And the pressure builds and builds, not so much from what’s in the pot as from our frantic struggles to keep the lid on.

When we grow up and we need to take the lid off so that we can deal with our emotional reality as an adult, it can feel terrifying. But surprisingly, often when we actually look at what’s in our pot and feel it, it’s much more manageable than we had feared. You can indeed open your pots, look at what’s bubbling away in there, and then put the lid back on. Your old defenses will continue to work just fine when you want them to.

We have heard sluts accuse each other of being jealous as if it were a crime: “You’re jealous, aren’t you? Don’t try to deny it!” It is particularly important that you own your jealousy, to yourself and to your intimates. If you try to pretend that you are not jealous when you are, others may believe you and see no need to support or protect you—because you’re fine, right? Or they may conclude that you are failing to take responsibility for your own emotions. When you deny your jealousy to yourself, you take from yourself the opportunity to be compassionate with yourself, to offer yourself support and comfort.

Let us remember that _feeling_ jealousy (or any other emotion) is not a crime. Only actions can be a crime. Feelings are feelings, and they’re there whether you acknowledge them or not. But when you shove the feelings back into the pot, they may try devious routes to bring themselves to your attention, manifesting themselves as intensely irrational anger, unreasonable behavior, crushing anxiety over anything at all, temper tantrums, crying fits, or even physical illness. “Acting out” means doing things you don’t understand, driven by emotions you have refused to be aware of, in ways you may regret later.

Sometimes acting out takes the form of making ultimatums about what your partners may and may not do or, worse, trying to enforce retroactive “agreements” by getting all righteously indignant about how anybody could have figured out that it wasn’t okay to take Bob to the movie _you_ wanted to see, and aren’t they inconsiderate and rotten? You cannot deal constructively with jealousy by making other people wrong. Foisting your feelings off on your partners is a dead-end strategy: it just plain won’t work. Jealousy is an emotion that arises inside you; no person and no behavior can “make” you jealous. Like it or not, the only person who can make that jealousy hurt less or go away is you.

“Acting out’ means doing things you don’t understand, driven by emotions you have refused to be aware of, in ways you may regret later.”

Sometimes when a lover is jealous and in pain, we may find it easier to feel angry and push that person away than to stay close, staying in empathy, listening, and caring. When we blame this person for being jealous, what we’re really saying is that we can’t stand to listen to how much our beloved hurts when we’re on the way out the door to play with someone else. This seeming indifference is a crummy way to avoid dealing with our own guilt.

There are easier solutions. Feelings like to be listened to—other people’s feelings and your own. Once you understand that you _are_ doing something constructive when you just listen, or ask someone else to just listen to you, you can get those troublesome feelings out in the open and learn to satisfy them. The idea is to be nice to your feelings, to welcome them as guests, until they feel finished and move on through. Remember, you don’t have to fix anything: all you have to do is listen, to yourself or another, and understand that this hurts. Period.

Janet and a life partner had a difficult moment when she first told him that she was in love with one of her lovers:

> I’d been seeing this woman for a while and realized, much to my surprise, that my feelings toward her had gone beyond simple sexual friendship and into a deep romantic emotion that I identified as being in love. When I told my life partner about this, I think his first impulse was to feel threatened, insecure, and, yes, jealous. I could feel him getting close to exploding. It was hard for me not to try to fix things, to take back what I’d said about being in love or to simply leave the discussion altogether because I felt scared and guilty.
> 
> But he stayed on course, allowing the feelings to present themselves, but not allowing them to drive him into acting angry or defensive. He asked me some questions about what exactly this meant to us, and I was able to explain that I wasn’t planning to leave him, that my love for her was in no way a threat to my love for him, that she and I weren’t expecting to become primary partners—that, really, nothing had changed except my own emotions and the words I was using to describe them. We went on to revisit this discussion from time to time, especially when our busy schedules permitted me to spend some extra time with my lover.
> 
> She and I drifted apart fairly easily later on as we moved on to other things in our lives…and, for that matter, so did he and I, less easily. But all three of us who were involved in that particular triangle can look back with pride at the way we gave each other the space and respect we needed to process a change that at first felt terribly threatening to us all.

You can feel jealousy without acting on it. Flying into a rage and breaking all the crockery, or calling your lover’s lover and hanging up every fifteen minutes during your first sleepless night, or picking a fight with whoever’s handy won’t help you feel better. All these are things that people do to _not_ feel jealous, to _not_ feel scared and small. Anger can help us feel powerful when we use it to push vulnerable feelings away, but it won’t actually make us stronger or safer.

When you hold still with your jealousy, you will find that it is possible to feel something difficult without doing anything you don’t choose to do. You will have taken your second step at disempowering your jealousy. You’ve told your jealousy that you will not allow it to drive you to do anything that might destroy your loving relationships.

Khalil Gibran wrote something truly profound about the nature of pain: “Your pain is the breaking of the shell that encloses your understanding.”

Whitewater Rafting

So there you are, shell cracked, with waves of pain washing over you. What do you do? Get as comfortable as you can and see how you can learn to ride those waves instead of drowning under them. Gather up the courage to feel what you’re feeling. Explore your feelings, nourish them, treasure them—they are the most essential part of you.

Be good to yourself and remember that the most important part of love is not loving someone’s beauty and strength and virtue. The real test of love is when someone sees our weaknesses, our stupidities, and our smallnesses, and still loves us. This unconditional love is what we want from our lovers, and we should expect no less from ourselves.

Remember, as you look at yourself, to look kindly, and also remember that you are not balancing a checkbook: anything you see that you don’t like, or that you want to change, is not a debit that you subtract from your virtues. When you learn to reflect on your strengths, it becomes easier to look at your weaknesses with acceptance and compassion. Keep your virtues at their full value and cherish them.

Start by setting yourself the task of getting through a short period of time with your jealousy, like an evening or an afternoon when your partner may be off with another. Make a pact with yourself that you will stay with your feelings, whatever they may be, for this brief time. If a whole evening or night seems like too long, start with five or ten minutes, then arrange to distract yourself with a video or whatever.

It Might Be Easier Than You Thought

One of the possible, and indeed common, outcomes will be that your partner will go off on a date with another and you will feel just fine. Surprise! Your anticipation may have been a lot worse than the actual event. Experienced sluts often find that they feel jealous only now and then. When they do experience jealousy, they examine those specific experiences to see what they can learn about themselves and then brainstorm strategies to make that particular sort of event safer and easier.

One couple we talked to is working to maintain their relationship in a difficult situation: one of them is out of town most of the time on business, and thus much of their activity with other partners takes place under circumstances that prevent them from reconnecting physically afterward. One of their agreements is that they talk on the phone every single night, regardless of where they are or how busy they are. Often, their conversations take place after one of them has spent time connecting with an outside partner. One of them notes their experience during these conversations:

> He allows my feelings. I don’t hesitate to say anything I want; in fact, he encourages me to. I’ve found that just being allowed to say these things, to talk about my jealousy and sadness, somehow defuses them. They lose a lot of their power because they meet no resistance from him; he just listens to them and lets them be.

Feel Your Feelings

Painful feelings, even the most intense of them, have a tendency to run their course if you let them, so an initial strategy is to make yourself as comfortable as possible and wait. Find your jealous feelings—hurt or anger or whatever—and let them flow through you, like a river. Your mind may be racing with nasty thoughts, anger, or blame, focusing on some detail that you’re absolutely certain those other people did wrong, believing that someone is taking advantage of you or riding roughshod over your naked emotions, and obsessing over it. You hurt a lot, so surely it must be somebody’s fault! But sometimes there is great pain, and there is no villain. Allow us to reassure you: we all go through this. Don’t die of shame, just let these thoughts run on through.

Make a commitment to take care of yourself in a kind way. Feelings, once uncovered, can be better understood by befriending them. It is useful to have scripts and strategies for self-exploration. Journal writing can be a good way to vent feelings and learn about yourself at the same time. It is okay to cover pages of your journal with “FUCK FUCK FUCK I HATE THIS!” in bright red ink; if this feels good to you, we recommend you get an extra-large journal. Try writing down your stream of consciousness, which means whatever you find in your head whether or not it makes sense, and see what you get. Treasures, jewels of self-knowledge, are often found here.

“Make a commitment to take care of yourself in a kind way.”

You can get a big drawing pad and a set of oil pastels, which are crayons for grown-ups. These big crayons encourage expression with bright colors and discourage getting hung up on details. Sometimes you will draw and get squiggles, and that’s great; the smallest thing you can accomplish will help you hold still for a while and rant in color. Other times, you may surprise yourself with a drawing that is profoundly meaningful to you.

Some people like to express their feelings with their bodies and might like to run or work out at the gym or clean the kitchen or dig in the garden. Safety note: if your feelings like intense physical expression, you will need to keep a piece of your mind alert; you’re heavily adrenalized and feel stronger than you actually are, so give a little attention to what you can do without injury.

Try finding music that fits your mood, angry or sad or frantic, and dance your feelings out. It can also be very satisfying to get a cheap plastic tennis racket and beat up your couch: Kneel in front of the couch, raise the racket above your head, and bring it down with all your strength. Keep your eyes open, imagine anything on the couch that you are angry at except yourself, and yell, loudly, how you feel.

When you express yourself, you get to know yourself better and work out some of the most intense stress constructively. At the least, you could wind up with a clean kitchen.

Try focusing on the feelings in your body: where do you feel these emotions, in your throat, chest, gut? Turning your attention to the physical sensations can intensify them and might bring up tears, but they will move on through if you allow yourself to feel them on the physical level. If rage comes welling up, you can pound on a pillow. If you start to cry, let it flow, remembering the sense of relief that comes after expressing intense emotion in tears.

Sometimes you will try out a way of venting your anger and find that it makes you feel worse. Make yourself a soothing cup of tea and don’t do that again—it’s not your way.

Some people have trouble doing this because they’ve been taught that it’s wrong to feel sorry for yourself. You’re allowed to feel bad for anyone else you know, so why shouldn’t you take some time to feel bad for yourself? This is hard and you’re struggling, so be kind to yourself.

New neurological studies show something really interesting: fear cannot coexist with gratitude. So if you’re feeling scared or insecure, try remembering three things you’re grateful for and see if anything shifts.

EXERCISE: REASSURANCE

Here’s an exercise you can do with your partner to learn how to take care of each other even when times are hard.

Make a list of ten things your partner could do that would reassure you.

Avoid abstractions—focus on behaviors, not emotions. “Love me more” is an emotion and thus hard to act on; how will you know that your partner loves you more? “Bring me a rose” is a behavior that anybody with a dollar can perform. Write your list in private, your partner can do the same, and then you can get together and look at each other’s lists.

This assignment may be more complicated than it sounds. Many questions may come up in your mind: How could I ask for that? Shouldn’t my partner already know? If I have to ask for it, does it really count? If my partner loved me, wouldn’t this be happening already?

If you’re having thoughts like these, imagine what it might feel like to be asked for reassurance by your partner. Wouldn’t it feel good to know how you could help? We can’t read each other’s minds, but we do care, and we can help once we know how.

Who’s to Blame?

As you get skilled at finding and expressing your feelings, you can try a more challenging task: see if you can write about or talk to your friend about your feelings without blaming anybody—not your lover, not your lover’s lover, and especially not yourself. This exercise is not easy: you will be surprised how readily we all slip into that blaming mode, but it is very, very worthwhile to learn to have your feelings without foisting them on someone else.

It also helps to pay attention to how we attribute intention. “You’re just doing this because you want to make me mad”—how often do you suppose that’s actually true? We just about never make anybody mad on purpose; the results are usually unpleasant. It’s easy to invent other people’s intentions for them to try to make sense of what you’re feeling…but it can be very hard for them to speak their truth if someone’s accusing them of intentions they never had.

Only when we’re all willing to own our emotions, and let our lovers and friends own theirs, does anyone have the power to change and grow.

When You Are the Third Party

All these ideas about taking good care of yourself apply whether you are single or partnered, but those of us who live alone have to make special preparations to avoid becoming isolated with our feelings. (We’ve written about this at much more length in chapter 21, “The Single Slut.”) You need to reach out to close friends or perhaps get to a support group or munch in your area. Make agreements with friends to listen to each other’s feelings. Don’t forget to plan time for serious communication with the partner in question. Being single, or other than a live-in partner, does not mean you will never feel jealousy or any other difficult feelings.

When we are dating but not living together, we may have trouble making time for serious discussions of our feelings, our differences, or, for that matter, how we each understand and appreciate the relationship we are having. To make time, many people place a special value on actually sleeping together: the sharing of coffee, the slow awakening, and even ordinary old breakfast. If each time you connect with your sweetie is intended to be hot and heavy sex, it can be hard to make space for simple conversation, talking about feelings, hearing feelings, getting to know and appreciate each other, getting connected. If you don’t sleep together, try getting together for lunch or brunch at some other time, or make a date to hike in the country or on a beach, or visit a botanical garden or a museum.

Baby Yourself

When your emotions are overwhelming and chaotic, it can help to ask yourself whether there is anything you could do that would help you feel just one tiny bit safer. Let go of the big picture: maybe it’s too big to figure the whole thing out right now. Take a few deep breaths, consciously relax some muscles, listen to soothing music. Try wrapping yourself in a soft blanket. It may not seem like much, but once you manage to do anything that improves your lot even the littlest bit, you are moving in the right direction to build some confidence that you can learn to deal with your jealousy.

Give yourself permission to take good care of yourself while you learn to work through hard feelings. Treat it like the flu: nurture yourself. What are the things you find comforting? Give them to yourself: hot chocolate, warm towels after a long soak, a long session with your most beloved movie or computer game, your favorite teddy bear? Effective self-nurturing often happens on the level of body awareness, so nice physical experiences—massages, hot baths, skin lotion, flannel pajamas—can give a sense of comfort and security even when your mind is anxious and your thoughts are a mess. Give yourself permission to take the best possible care of yourself.

When you anticipate feeling jealous, make plans to occupy your time. It may be too much to ask that you always have a hot date at exactly the same time as your lover: most people’s schedules are too complicated. So what do you do when your partner’s date comes down with the flu? Do you cancel your date? The people you make these dates with might be counting on you, the time they have with you might be important to them. Third parties have a right to some predictability in their lives, too.

But even if you can’t round up a hot date for yourself, you can probably find a friend to watch a movie with, talk obsessively (with due attention to confidentiality, of course), eat cookies, chew your fingernails, do whatever works. We do not recommend drinking and drugging, as getting high might very well increase the intensity of your disturbance and disinhibit you enough that you might forget your commitment to experience your jealousy without acting on it. A certain amount of escapism is fine, but if you anesthetize yourself so that you feel nothing at all, you will lose the opportunity to develop skills at dealing with the feelings you’re having.

Acquiring these skills takes practice, like meditating or learning to skate. At first you feel stupid and wonder why you’re doing it, and it doesn’t work very well. But if you practice taking good care of yourself, after a while your view of the world changes a little, and it becomes a much more friendly and welcoming place, because you’ve created it that way.

EXERCISE: FIFTEEN WAYS TO BE KIND TO YOURSELF

Write a list of fifteen easy things you can do to be kind to yourself: for instance, “Go to the store and buy myself a flower” or “Soak my feet in hot water and give them a rub.” Sometimes it helps to ask yourself: “What could I do to feel a little bit safer or better or taken care of?” Put the items on your list on index cards. The next time you feel upset and could use a kindness, pull a card and do what it says.

Tough It Out

When no better plan is available, there is nothing wrong with gritting your teeth, biting the bullet, and hanging in there until it’s over. Dossie remembers her first challenge after she decided to never be monogamous again:

> I had been casually dating a young man and had told him at great length that I was not available for partnering and had no intention of ever being monogamous again. He came over to visit at my home when my best friend was there, we all got a little stoned, and he came on to her. She liked him and didn’t know I was involved with him, so they started necking right in the middle of my living room. Eeeek! My thoughts went racing as I watched them, thinking: “Well, it’s not like I want to marry him, and I don’t think I feel like joining them, and I don’t think my friend is bisexual anyway, so what do I do?” Miss Manners has said nothing on the appropriate etiquette for this situation. For a while I sat frozen, to tell the truth, and finally I thought to myself, “Okay, so there’s no script, I’ll have to make one up. What would I be doing if my friend and my new lover weren’t rolling around on the floor with their braces locked?” I guessed I’d be taking notes from the tarot book I was reading, so I went upstairs and studied, gritting my teeth. Focusing on my notes gave me at least a little relief by occupying my mind. Eventually they left, and I got through a strange and lonely night, not feeling necessarily great, but at least proud of myself that I had survived. I felt not at all damaged, really okay. What I got a grip on was my own strength, so…funky as it was, this was my first successful run through jealousy.

Go for the Ick

Here’s a good question to ask yourself as you seek to understand your jealousy: “What are the specific images that disturb me the most?” Chances are you are already imagining along these lines, so you’re not likely to make yourself feel worse by thinking about the scary stuff on purpose.

Those disturbing images, the ones that really bother you, are not telling you what your partner is doing—you actually don’t know what your partner is doing. When we don’t know what’s going on, few of us are able to just say, “I don’t know” and stop thinking about it. We fill in the blanks and, to do that, we make something up. What you see when you fill in the blanks has nothing to do with reality: it is your fear. So now you know what you are afraid of and know nothing about what is really happening.

Our minds, like nature, abhor a vacuum. We get nervous. Think of the last time you were waiting for someone to return a call or a family member was significantly late coming home. Did you call the highway patrol, send out frantic texts, imagine terrible possibilities? Maybe you can make an agreement to call each other before you leave a lover’s house for the trip home, just to help prevent this kind of worry.

One powerful way to come to terms with your fears is to acknowledge them: “Yes, I’m afraid of that.” Reality is almost always less terrifying than fiction, so you can counter your fears with reality testing.

Pay attention also to your imaginings that are less dangerous, less anxiety-ridden. You may be surprised to find that imagining your lover in the midst of sex with someone else is less scary than you thought it would be, or maybe images of kissing bother you more than intercourse, or whatever. Try writing down your imaginings on index cards and then putting them in order from the most to the least scary.

Then you will know what parts scare you the most and what the safer-feeling parts are. Now you have something to turn your mind toward that will help you feel a little bit safer, which is your first step on the road to becoming nearly comfortable.

Remember the Good Stuff

Make a list of everything you value about your relationship and put it aside for a rainy day. Be an optimist, turn your mind to the positive end of things. Value what you have and what you get from your partner: the time, attention, and love, the good stuff that fills your cup. Avoid being the pessimist who focuses on what is not there, the energy that goes somewhere else. That energy is not subtracted from what you receive; relationships are not balanced like checkbooks. So when you are feeling deprived, remember all the good stuff you get from your partnership.

EXERCISE: TREASURES

Make a list of ten or more reasons why your partner is lucky to have you. Put the list in your pocket and carry it around with you for a few days.

Make a list of ten or more reasons why you are lucky to have this partner.

Maybe you and this partner could both make lists and share them.

Sharing

You and your partners need to practice talking about jealousy. A couple we know tell us that they have developed a convention in their relationship that each can ask the other for what they call a “jelly moment.” In your jelly moment, you get to say what’s bothering you. Perhaps you feel scared and jealous, nervous about saying goodbye for the weekend, small and silly, and your knees are feeling like, well, jelly. Your partner’s commitment is to listen, sympathize, and validate. That’s the response: not “Okay, I’ll cancel my date with Blanche,” but “Aw, honey, I’m sorry you feel bad. I love you, and I’ll be back soon.”

When we tell our partners that we feel jealous, we are making ourselves vulnerable in a very profound way. When our partners respond with respect, listen to us, validate our feelings, and support and reassure us, we feel better taken care of than we would have if no difficulty had arisen in the first place. So we strongly recommend that you and your partners give each other the profoundly bonding experience of sharing your vulnerabilities. We are all human, we are all vulnerable, and we all need validation.

“When we tell our partners that we feel jealous, we are making ourselves vulnerable in a very profound way.”

Your strategies for surviving periods of jealousy will stand you in good stead for the rest of your life, and you will use what you learn about yourself from this practice over and over. All of the techniques listed above are applicable to other difficult events, like job interviews and writing your resume. Now you have a repertoire of ways to deal with bouts of jealousy; these tools will also help you handle other painful emotions that may come your way. So when you get this far, congratulate yourself. Celebrate your successes: Write “I am a genius” two dozen times with lots of bright colors. Buy yourself something nifty. You’ve done a lot of hard work and you deserve a reward.

A Spiritual Path?

When you grow beyond your jealousy by doing the healing that your jealousy is calling on you to do, you’re also stepping out of old paradigms and familiar assumptions into the unknown, which is scary. Working to change your emotions requires that you open up, be willing to feel, flinching when necessary, becoming more conscious. Isn’t that what spirituality is, an opened and expanded consciousness?

Jealousy can become your path, not only to healing old wounds but also to **openheartedness**—opening your heart to your lovers and to yourself as you open your relationships to fit in all the love and sex and fulfillment that truly are available to you.

A final note about love: One remedy for the fear of not being loved is to remember how good it feels to love someone. If you’re feeling unloved and you want to feel better, go love someone and see what happens.

On Romance

One of the words people use to talk about their relationships is _romantic_. In Dossie’s therapy practice, sometimes a client will shrug off a new connection, saying, “Oh, that’s not a romantic relationship.” It’s not a word either of us uses much, so we set off to figure out what it means.

We asked a few friends. What we learned is that romance, to a lot of people, seems to have to do with the depth of emotion and commitment, and/or with plugging into a particular, idealized story. Romance, for many, seems to mean a particular kind of narrative rather than a kind of feeling. Think, for example, about the distinction that many people draw between “romantic” relationships and “sexual” relationships: in the former, there’s an implied trajectory. We’ve all seen this story over and over in books and movies and television: boy meets girl (or boy meets boy or girl meets girl), there’s a date, there’s a second date, there’s a third date in which sex is had, there are understandings and misunderstandings and gifts and funny/quirky moments, and then there’s a wedding, at which each partner promises a lifetime of “cleaving unto.”

We see nothing at all wrong with any of this, up until the very end. Very few of us ever got to read stories in which the happily-ever-after included three (or four or more) people. Even fewer ever considered the possibility that they might wish to do one kind of, er, cleaving with one person and another kind with another. Fewer yet learned that parting company and rediscovering one another as friends or coparents or loving exes can be part of the story of romance, too.

Because we all grew up surrounded by this story in everything from fairy tales to erotica, it sometimes creates expectations that can interfere with your goals as an ethical slut. The one-size-fits-all “romance” narrative can lead you to try to force all your relationships into it, whether or not that story is a good fit for you, the real, nonfictional person in front of you, and the relationship you could build together.

So if you’re the kind of person who dreams of a single red rose and a walk on the beach at sunset, enjoy that lovely dream, and know that you can learn to dream it with different details, with different people, in as many ways as your imagination and libido can carry you.
