12 FLIRTING AND CRUISING
=====================

Flirting and cruising are skills that you can learn, even though few people develop them overnight.

Is there a difference between flirting and cruising? The distinction is not clear cut. Some people think of “flirting” as what you do in environments that are not erotically oriented and “cruising” as what you do in clubs, conferences, bars, and other places where people often seek sex partners. Or you might see flirting as a more introductory maneuver and cruising as what you do when you know for sure that you’re interested. Both involve an exchange of sexual energy in the form of eye contact, body language, smiles and warmth, and little flashes of erotic energy that can be shared long before any physical contact would be appropriate.

Gender roles can complicate both flirting and cruising. People raised as men in this culture are taught to push, insist, never take no for an answer; those raised as women are taught to be coy, duck and dodge, never offer an outright yes. The more polarized we get in this silly equation, the further we push one another away—with results that range from hurt feelings to date rape.

“When all genders feel free to answer yes or no, a truer understanding and a more positive sexuality become possible.”

The good news, though, is that both sets of behaviors can be unlearned. When all genders feel free to answer yes or no with no concern for anything but their own desires, a truer understanding and a more positive sexuality become possible.

Saying Yes, Saying No

Sexual sophisticates tend to give each other a lot of credit for knowing what they want. With this assumption, it becomes easier for your potential partners to make very direct proposals that might seem outrageous in any other context; that’s because they trust you to say no if you’re not interested. It is nobody’s task but your own to figure out what you want, and nobody can or should second-guess you. So you are going to have to learn to say no and to say no easily enough that having to turn down a couple of unwelcome come-ons won’t ruin your evening.

Most people have trouble with “no”—many men are taught that they are always supposed to be eager for sex, so if someone comes on to them when they are not ready or not interested, it can feel unmanly and wrong to say no.

The trick to a comfortable “no” is to structure it in such a way that it’s about you, not about them. So instead of, “With _you_ ? Are you out of your mind?” you’re saying, “No, thanks. You seem nice but I’m not feeling much connection with you” or “No, thanks. I’m not really looking for lovers right now” or “No, thanks. I prefer to get to know people a lot better before I do anything like that with them.” Important note: the “thanks” should be sincere. Being asked, even by someone you don’t find attractive, is a compliment and deserves a thank-you. If you think someone is ridiculous for finding you attractive, we worry about your self-esteem.

Many women have been taught that it is unfeminine to say no directly. Ask yourself: When was the last time you said no to sex? How did you do it? Was it with a polite and friendly but unmistakable “No, thanks”? Or was it with “Not tonight; I’ve got a headache” or “Maybe another time” or “I’ll think about it”? We strongly suggest you work out a “No, thanks” that feels comfortable to you; expecting the interested party to read your mind and somehow know that your “maybe…” means “no” is neither ethical nor slutty.

We also need to practice saying yes. Our cultural myth is that the man in a heterosexual interaction pleads with or cons or bullies the woman into saying yes, or at least refraining from saying no, and then does whatever he thinks is appropriate. Female-identified people need to equalize, to do more of the choosing, to know what it is that you enjoy and to be able to say clearly what you want to whomever you find attractive. And if you are a male-identified person whose programming is more about what you think you are supposed to want than what you actually want, then you need to learn to say yes to your real desires when they appear on your doorstep.

Once you’ve gotten comfortable with “no,” “yes” is usually easier. Try it, in all its variations: “Yes, please.” “Yes, when?” “Yes, but I have some limits I want to tell you about first.” “Yes, but I need you to talk to my partner first.” “Yes, but not tonight; how does next Tuesday look for you?” “Hell, yes!”

“Once you’ve gotten comfortable with ‘no,’ ‘yes’ is usually easier.”

The Fine Art of Flirting

Everybody is born knowing how to flirt, and if you doubt it, watch the way a baby or toddler interacts with nearby adults: lots of eye contact, smiles, maybe a chortle of welcome, and the offer of a beloved toy (which must, according to the rules, be handed back after due admiration, just like adult toys).

Most of us, though, lose this precious ability by the time we’re grown-ups and need to learn it all again from scratch. Your authors believe that great flirting should be an end in itself rather than a means to an end. Practice flirting for fun and maybe put aside, for the moment, any specific goals about getting laid. Focus on getting good connection. Watch the way many gay men flirt with straight women—friendly flattery, lighthearted innuendo, nonthreatening intimacy, all made possible by the realization that the interaction is intended simply for mutual pleasure, not in the hopes of a quick dash to the nearest bedroom.

We suggest, then, that you learn to flirt simply by practicing. The sort of behavior you may associate with the word _flirting_ (“Hey, baby, what’s your sign?”) is not the sort of thing we’re talking about and is, in fact, its exact opposite. Great flirting is about _seeing_; hunger to be seen is a natural human emotion, and when you show people that you’re seeing them, it’s natural for them to start seeing you.

A lot of flirting is nonverbal. There’s a way of holding eye contact for just a moment longer than usual—more than a passing glance, less than an outright stare—that lets a person know that you find them worth looking at. Turn your body so that you’re facing the object of your interest and stay physically open, arms and legs uncrossed. Smile.

If your flirting proceeds to words, we suggest a sincere, personal, but nonsexual compliment to start. Is the person next to you on the park bench leading a poodle that’s sporting a fresh haircut? Did you hear through the grapevine that your next-door neighbor just got a nice promotion at work? A sincere compliment on any of these is a way of saying, “I’m paying attention to you; you’re not just a face in the crowd to me.” This approach may not seem like flirting to you, but trust us, it’s a great first step. Commenting on physical appearance, particularly in a sexual way (“Those pants make your ass look great!”) is _not_ what we’re talking about. Your goal is to make your friend feel fully seen, not reduced to an agglomeration of body parts.

Watch for feedback. If we were flirting with you and you turned your face away from us, took a step back, or crossed your arms, we’d know you weren’t interested in connecting and we’d move on gracefully. We wouldn’t like it any better than anyone else does, but we’d do our best not to feel rejected—you don’t know us and don’t know what you’re missing out on. Besides, for all we know, you’re on the way to a date with someone you already know and are simply not available at that moment.

One of the most successful flirts we know says he has a never-fail opening line: “Hi, I’m Mike.” From there, he and the object of his attention can proceed wherever their interests take them: the weather or scenery, their work, their kids or pets, the sorry state of the world today, their favorite foods, whatever. This stage of flirting is exploration, getting to know this wonderful new person, discovering the ways in which you’re similar and the ways in which you’re different, seeing how you might connect. The sexy part of this is in the energy—the flash of a smile, a brightness in the eye. You usually can tell when you’re talking and when you’re flirting—it’s the energy.

We recognize that if you are shy or have been taught that nice girls or boys don’t flirt or are accustomed to a more predatory style of flirting, all this can be difficult to learn. We wish we had a magic flirting wand that we could wave at you, but since we don’t, you’re just going to have to practice. A willing friend, preferably of the gender (if not the orientation) that you normally flirt with, can help: pretend that you’re meeting for the first time and try flirting. The friend can give you feedback about whether you’re coming on too weak or too strong and help you refine your skills. When you start enjoying flirting in and of itself, without thinking about where it might lead, you’ll know you’re on the right track.

“We wish we had a magic flirting wand that we could wave at you, but since we don’t, you’re just going to have to practice.”

Coming Out Slutty

Unless you’re doing your cruising in exclusively poly environments, it is reasonable to expect that the object of your attentions may not (yet) have read this book and may not be familiar with slutty lifestyles. At some point, therefore, you are going to have to get it out there that monogamy is probably not on your personal menu of options.

We can’t tell you exactly when or how to do this, except that we vote for sooner rather than later. If both of you are just looking for a quick fling or a party scene, it may not be necessary to discuss such matters at all. However, if the fling leads to a second date, that may be the right time to let your new friend know that you’re not interested in going steady, now or ever.

Working this into a normal conversation about software or surfing can be a little tricky, we know. A quick reference to your partners, emphasis on the plural, often does the trick. You can start a discussion of relationships in general to get space to express your own opinions and desires. Or you can leave this book out on your coffee table when they come over for a drink.

It may happen that the object of your attention is a devoted monogamist and that you nonetheless find this person extremely attractive. We have some words of advice for polyfolk who fall in love with monogamists in chapter 20, “Couples and Groups.”

Cruising Challenges

If you’re standing in the corner of a roomful of people, feeling like you’re the only one there who isn’t part of a happy group and like you’re never going to be able to connect again for the rest of your life, we suggest finding someone else who’s standing in a corner and starting a conversation. Janet’s favorite opening line for these situations is, “Hi, I don’t know a soul here; can I stand here and talk to you for a while?”

Beyond that simple opening, which gets easier with practice, cruising strategies depend a lot on your own gender and the gender(s) of the people you’re seeking.

FOR MEN

Men who desire men have their own style of cruising, marked by a straightforward approach based on the understanding that most gay and bi men are able to say, “No, thank you” without much discomfort. Without the uncomfortable threat of being physically overpowered that pervades man-on-woman cruising, and free of any requirements beyond following their own desires, these men often are able to cruise each other with greater reliance on body language and nonverbal cues than their heterosexual brothers, confident that if body language is not understood, they will use their words.

Hetero men have different challenges. Few women like to be pushed, overwhelmed, or not listened to in the arenas of sex and intimacy. Most women are particularly offended by men who push too hard for private get-togethers or phone numbers, who insistently move the conversation back to sexual topics when the woman has tried several times to change the subject, or who touch them, particularly in a sexual, paternalistic, or covert way, without permission. Sneaky come-ons are a pain; it works better to simply ask, and if you hear a “no,” don’t argue.

Many a man has made the mistake of approaching a woman in the way he thinks he would like to be approached if he were a woman. If you’re not sure if women find your approach too heavy-handed, imagine being approached by a large, strong man using your exact technique and ask yourself how that feels. Successful male cruisers remain sensitive to verbal and nonverbal cues, conveying friendly interest and appreciation for the fascinating human being in front of them.

FOR WOMEN

Many women, of all orientations, can benefit greatly from learning to be more assertive in asking for what they want, both during the meeting process and afterward. If you’re used to sipping your drink and waiting for someone to make a move on you, initiating contact yourself may seem terribly awkward, pushy—yes, even slutty—at first. It’s also scary as hell to risk rejection like that. It _does_ get easier…particularly if you do get rejected a time or two and get a chance to find out that it isn’t the end of the world. After all, we’re not asking you to do anything that men haven’t been doing for centuries, and you’ll discover, as they have, the many joys of asking for what you want and getting it.

FOR TRANS AND NONBINARY PEOPLE

The big question in flirting and cruising, if you’re someone whose parts don’t match up to their gender presentation or whose gender presentation doesn’t match up to cultural norms, is usually, “How much do they know?” For this reason, many of our friends who live outside gender norms prefer to do their cruising online, where they can make sure the object of their attention is interested in someone like them before investing their hope, time, and occasionally personal safety in a new person who may or may not be aware that gender is a lot more complicated than their eighth-grade health teacher said.

On the other hand, as one trans woman we interviewed pointed out, “Even when you’re cruising in person, it’s worth keeping in mind that _lots_ of people have things they need to disclose before things start getting hot and heavy—health issues, having a partner at home, sexual or personal limits, and so on.” So maybe you can think of that thing inside your undies, that may or may not be a surprise, as simply another issue that you need to talk about before the smooching begins.

Many of our trans friends recall being the catalyst for someone’s reexamination of their assumptions about their sexual identity: one spoke of being at a gender conference with a woman who had always identified as a lesbian and who was startled to find herself drawn to trans men, trans women, and individuals who didn’t fit easily into any gender category. They also note that many of the people they meet are unaware of the finer points of contemporary gender theory. “At first, I got angry when people didn’t understand my place on the gender spectrum,” one trans man noted. “But after a while, I got better at being able to tell the difference between a person who was hostile or malicious and one who simply didn’t know and was doing their best.” This man went on to say that he’d actually come to enjoy gently educating potential sweeties about what it was like to live inside his skin.

Whether or not you want to do some educating along with your flirting, we think it makes sense to decide how strongly you want to draw those boundaries—nobody wants to do all their flirting within a small group of already like-minded people, but nobody wants to spend all their flirting time teaching Gender 101, either. Figure out a balance that works for you and be prepared to have it shift as your desires and abilities change through the years.

FOR COUPLES AND GROUPS

Sometimes couples, or an established group of lovers, may be cruising for somebody, or somebodies, new to play with in a three-or-more-way. Cruising as a group has its advantages—if you strike out, you still have someone to go home with. However, many cruisees are not used to the idea of openly nonmonogamous relationships and may get a little freaked out when you come on to them with, “Hi, I find you very attractive and so do my partners.” Be reassured that you will also find many lovely people who actually prefer the safety and built-in boundaries of getting it on with one, both, or all members of an established partnership.

Some groups cruise together for someone to play with in a three-or-more-way, while others cruise individually for partners who want to play with one or the other of them. When you’re partnered but cruising solo, please do remember to mention to your cruisee that you have a partner or partners at home. Some people will be delighted to receive this news and others will not, but full disclosure is the ethical part of ethical sluthood.

If you plan to go home with your partners when it comes time to leave the party, it is courteous to make sure your other beloveds know this in advance. Reassure new contacts by exchanging contact information and, if appropriate, choosing a place and time to get together in the future, like “May I call you tomorrow morning?” or “Would you like to meet for coffee after work?”

Whether you cruise individually or with others, you need to work out your agreements beforehand. Who is interested in doing what to whom? Where? When? If one of you is looking for someone to hit the mattress with right there that night and the other wants something permanent (“They followed me home! Can I keep them? Please?”), you may be headed for a major misunderstanding.

Each member of a partnership must have the requisite social skills. Depending on a partner to do all the work of introductions, conversation, flirtation, and negotiation is bad for you and bad for them. It may also lead to misunderstandings, because few partners are skilled enough communicators to get across _all_ your needs, interests, and personality traits.

A pet peeve of many sluts is the individual who treats one or more of the people involved in a disrespectful or objectifying manner. One example is the couple that sends an innocent-looking woman out as bait, and you may be startled, when you bite, to discover her spouse joining the party. Janet remembers once, in a group sex environment, being invited by a man to help stimulate his female partner. As she happily joined the group, she noticed that the man immediately shifted his focus from his girlfriend to _her_ —ignoring the hapless girlfriend as he grabbed Janet’s breasts. Needless to say, Janet excused herself immediately from this creepy-feeling scene.

It is disrespectful to treat the third party as some sort of oversized marital aid. Many bisexual women we know are exasperated when couples seek them out as a “hot bi babe,” looking for someone that they can slot into a predefined role as part of their lovemaking and/or their household. Poly people often refer to such a woman as a “unicorn,” because they are rare and possibly mythical. Their analog, the bisexual man who is expected to fulfill the needs of an otherwise hetero couple, is sometimes called a “pegasus.”

The fundamental rule for cruising as a couple or group, or being cruised by a couple or group, is _respect_ for the feelings and relationships of all concerned. You don’t want to cruise someone who will try to steal you or your partner for their own, and your cruisee doesn’t want to be used, deceived, or mistreated.

Dossie was once out on a date with a longtime lover of hers when she noticed an attractive person trying to catch her eye behind her date’s back. She explained the situation to her date, who had a stroke of genius. He strode over to the young man in question and with great dignity announced, “My lady would like you to have her phone number.” The young man looked terrified at the time, but he called the next morning. Dossie has made use of this strategy repeatedly since then and recommends it highly: they always call!

When you treat everybody involved with respect, affection, and intimacy, you can reap very special rewards—anything from a warm happy fling to a long-term multiperson relationship.

FOR EVERYONE

The best, most successful, and least obnoxious cruisers we know, of all genders and orientations, are friendly, curious folks who like most people and are interested in talking to everyone. If some of the people they talk to turn into potential relationships, so much the better.

When you find yourself worrying about how you are seen by others, remember that there is no point in pretending you are anyone except who you are. It does you no good to attract someone who thinks you are somebody else: all you get is someone who is excited about somebody who isn’t you. When you are honest, you attract the people who are interested in you, just as you most wonderfully are.

Poly Pioneers: “A Bouquet of Lovers” and the Zell-Ravenheart Family

Possibly the very first how-to guide for contemporary polyamorists was written more than a quarter century ago. Its author had been a practicing polyamorist for almost twenty years before being moved to set forth her basic principles.

_A Bouquet of Lovers: Strategies for Responsible Open Relationships_, written by Morning Glory Zell-Ravenheart in 1990, offered some solid guidelines for relationships of the primary/secondary model—guidelines that will sound familiar to readers of this book today.

And, like this book, its creator and original publisher discovered their values during the Free Love era. Two young seekers met at a neopagan conference in 1973. The former Diana Moore and the former Timothy Zell would be together—as radicals, lovers, and elders of a polyamorous family that has lasted, in various forms, for almost fifty years—until Diana, better known as Morning Glory Zell-Ravenheart, died in 2014.

Together with like-minded lovers, the Zell-Ravenhearts founded the Church of All Worlds, a neopagan and poly institution loosely based on the church described in Robert Heinlein’s immensely popular science fiction novel _Stranger in a Strange Land_. Oberon (formerly Timothy) Zell-Ravenheart publishes _Green Egg Magazine_, a neopagan publication founded in 1968 and still published online, in which _A Bouquet of Lovers_ first appeared.

Oberon and the remainder of the family continue to live together in two big houses in Sonoma County, California.