13 KEEPING SEX SAFE
================

The term _safe sex_, later amended to _safer sex_, was coined to talk about how we can design sex to minimize the risk of HIV transmission…but sex has never been altogether safe. It’s been only a few decades since more reliable birth control became available, and only a few before that since antibiotics began curing illness, insanity, and death caused by sexually transmitted diseases (STDs) like syphilis and gonorrhea. Herpes is still incurable, and we still have only limited answers to cervical cancer from human papilloma virus. No matter what your orientation, your practices, or your risk factors, in today’s environment, careless sex can kill—which means that you have to protect yourself and your partners.

Given that sex is never completely safe, ethical sluts put time, effort, and commitment into getting as much sex as they want at the least risk possible. Dedicated sluts have developed a plethora of risk-reduction strategies that can minimize the chances of infection and/or unwanted pregnancy, including barriers, vaccines, and medications that can prevent some diseases from being transferred during sex.

“Given that sex is never completely safe, ethical sluts put time, effort, and commitment into getting as much sex as they want at the least risk possible.”

Please research the safer-sex protocols that apply to your life and plan to protect yourself and your lover from HIV, herpes, hepatitis, gonorrhea, syphilis, chlamydia, shigella, human papilloma virus, cervical cancer, unwanted pregnancy, and a host of other nasties. Medical research and recommendations are beyond the scope of this volume, but the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention ([www.cdc.gov](http://www.cdc.gov)) maintains a website with up-to-date information on safer sex, as do many feminist and LGBTQ organizations.

We don’t think you need to cover every portion of your anatomy with latex before you touch another human being. The goal for most of us is risk reduction, sort of like defensive driving. Yes, a drunk could kill you at any time while you are cruising down the highway, and most of us take our best shot at safety and go on driving. There are ways to have hot satisfying sex without performing the erotic equivalent of skydiving with a faulty parachute. Here are some that we, and sluts we know, have used successfully.

Barriers: The Rubber (or Nitrile or Polyurethane or…) Fence

Utterly basic technique: Put something impenetrable between you and the virus. Today, many people decide to follow their sexual urges to far-out places by being scrupulous about the use of barriers. We hope you don’t need us to explain this to you at this point in history, but careful use of barriers includes condoms for vaginal sex, anal sex, and fellatio; gloves for masturbation of a male or female partner or for insertion of fingers or hands into vaginas or anuses; and dental dams or plastic wrap for cunnilingus or analingus.

Gloves or condoms make it easy to keep any sex toy that will be used by more than one person nice and clean and bug-free. Clean your toys thoroughly after each use, sterilize if you can, and let them rest, clean and dry (most of the bad bugs cannot live long without moisture). If there are toys that you really want to use on more than one person within the same little bit of time and that can’t be covered with a barrier, we suggest you buy two or more of them.

The use of a good water-based lubricant can do wonders to make barrier-using sex more pleasurable for both or all partners. For tips on how to use barriers in a pleasure-enhancing manner, check out chapter 23, “Sex and Pleasure,” and some of the books in Further Reading. And if you’re not completely comfortable using any of these barriers, practice!

Penis owners can masturbate with a condom until it becomes easy. We have heard of one dedicated fellow who managed to put on eighteen condoms at once—he said the tight squeeze felt really good. And why not get a little playful with your rubber? Female condoms require some practice to place properly over the cervix, so be prepared to use up a few—preferably before you have a partner sitting there twiddling their thumbs, waiting for you to figure it out—as you acquire the skill.

If you are inexperienced with condoms and plastic wrap, give yourself some space to learn. Get playful, spill some lube, and roll around in it; invent creative ways to wrap body parts in plastic wrap and then find out what interesting new things you can feel. Plastic wrap doubles nicely as a risk-reduction barrier and a bondage toy, and it comes in colors. Explore the taste and feel of your safer-sex equipment, and check lubricants on tender places for allergic reactions—not fun to discover when you are all excited that it itches inside and you have to go wash that stuff out right now. Pay attention to the sensual qualities: fine latex is wonderfully silky, and the best lubricants feel like liquid velvet.

We want you to have fun and make wise choices: we need all the readers we can get, so we don’t want to lose you.

EXERCISE: PRACTICE MAKES PERFECT

_For penis owners:_ Commit to masturbating with a condom at least once every three or four times you masturbate until you feel like you have that skill down perfectly.

_For anyone who has sex with penises:_ Buy a large box of condoms—the cheap kind are okay for this—and practice putting them on bananas, cucumbers, or dildos, in as sexy a way as you can…first with your hand and then with your mouth. Use up the whole box.

_For everyone:_ Make a list of ways you can get off with little or no risk of fluid transmission.

Fluid Bonding

One popular safer-sex strategy used by some couples and small groups is called **fluid bonding** or _fluid monogamy_. The primary couple or group agrees that they are safe to play with each other with no barriers, and that they will use condoms, dams, and/or gloves very conscientiously with all their other partners. Both of us have made such agreements with life partners. To do this kind of agreement, partners get thoroughly tested for HIV and other diseases. You might have to wait six months to be sure, because HIV antibodies don’t reliably show up in the bloodstream for some months after an individual is infected. Once you’re sure everyone’s healthy, you’re free to practice unprotected sex with one another and to use barriers with your other lovers. Be sure you’re in clear agreement about which sexual acts are safe enough to do without a barrier and which ones require a barrier. To reach such an agreement, everyone involved will have to do some homework on the risk levels of various activities and decide together what level of risk is acceptable to you. Don’t forget to factor in information from everybody’s individual sex histories.

You may wish to restrict certain kinds of sex—often vaginal and/or anal intercourse with a living penis, which place the participants at highest risk for disease transmission—to your primary relationship. Any time you are actively trying to make a baby, you might not want to engage in potentially reproductive activities with all and sundry.

If barriers were infallible, fluid bonding would be a nearly perfect strategy; unfortunately, they are not. Some diseases live on the pubic mound, perineum, outer labia, or scrotum, which latex can’t cover. Pinhole leaks can allow viruses to creep through, although this happens less often than antisex crusaders would have you believe. Condoms can break or come off during sex.

If you are fluid bonded and you experience a condom failure, you and anyone else involved will have to decide together whether to begin again with HIV testing and six months of barrier usage, or to risk the possibility that one of you has been infected and could infect the other. If there is any possibility of an unwanted pregnancy, talk together about the morning-after pill.

Preexposure Prophylaxis

If you engage in activities that could pass along HIV, or if you’re partnered with someone HIV-positive, look into PrEP, a new category of medication that is showing great promise in preventing HIV infection. PrEP consists of a drug that can be taken daily by anyone whose sexual behaviors put them at significant risk for contracting HIV. As of this writing, the drug seems to have a very high success rate and negligible side effects—in cities where doctors prescribe it regularly, the number of new HIV diagnoses are plummeting. We do want to note that this is a relatively new medication, it can be quite expensive, and there are still some doctors who are (inexcusably) reluctant to prescribe it to anyone except an HIV-negative person who is partnered with an HIV-positive person. It’s also worth pointing out that PrEP does not protect against other sexually transmitted conditions, including pregnancy; thus, condoms are still a good idea if you’re the owner of a fertile uterus or if you’re doing penetrative sex with people of unknown health status.

Avoiding High-Risk Behaviors

Another risk-reduction strategy is simply to eliminate some forms of sexual expression from your repertoire. Many people have chosen to forgo forms of sex that involve putting mouths or penises into or near anuses, feeling that the particularly high risks of this form of play are not worth its reward. Others have decided not to engage in any form of penetration with an organic penis.

If all this winds up sounding like no sex at all, please consult one of the good books about sex in Further Reading—there are hundreds of ways to share really hot sex that don’t involve somebody squirting inside somebody else.

Every decision you make requires that you balance your own desires against your assessment of the risks. Remember when you’re making your decisions that desire is powerful and important and that there’s no point in making rules you can’t live with. Even abstinence can be risky: one friend of ours points out that celibacy can be like dieting—“I can be really good during the week but then I binge on the weekends.” On the positive side, expanding your range of hot sexual expression by learning new and exciting ways to have sex can leave you both safe and satisfied.

“Every decision you make requires that you balance your own desires against your assessment of the risks.”

Sex and Drugs

If you think you can’t enjoy sex without being high or drunk, we’d like you to reconsider that belief. While a small amount of an intoxicant can relax you and help eliminate some nervousness, being significantly altered can lead to impaired boundaries, poor judgment, and misunderstandings about consent.

If you do want to try the riskier-than-usual experience of stoned or drunk sex, please remember to do your negotiations _before_ the scene begins, with an understanding that there will be no surprises or changing of agreements partway in. And make sure that everyone involved has consented: “Hey, honey, I just dropped a double dose of Ecstasy—let’s fuck” without the prior consent of those who might be affected is often a profoundly bad idea.

We prefer the natural high of endorphins, oxytocin, and all the other lovely chemicals our body produces during good sex—and the stuff that needs to be swallowed or inhaled or smoked or whatever can get in the way of feeling what we set out to feel, including our connection with the sweet individual who’s sharing the sex with us.

If you feel that your use of intoxicants has become problematic, many larger communities sponsor their own recovery groups, including groups for sluts. We encourage you to find a group where you feel enough at home to do the work of learning new habits without having to censor yourself.

Finger Crossing

We recognize that desire is a powerful force in our lives, and most of the time we like to celebrate that. But the reality is that acting on desire without taking responsibility is not ethical. A whole generation of people, particularly gay and bisexual men, grew up knowing that their desire to feel a living penis inside them could never be considered safe. PrEP has made things a little safer but still requires some advance, well, preparation. Barebacking (penetration without a condom) remains a very hot transgressive thrill that has tempted many of us to throw caution to the winds in the interest of getting that much closer to a lover.

Simply hoping for the best, denying that you’re at risk, or failing to keep your agreements about barriers is _not_ an acceptable strategy for birth control or disease protection. If you don’t have the honesty and courage to face the genuine risks of your sexual behaviors, you certainly don’t have what it takes to be an ethical slut, and we question whether you should be having sex at all.

We are shocked and worried by the levels of denial we see among some sexual communities that would like to believe that because new treatments have slowed down the progress of HIV, the cure has been found. People are still dying. Even if your lifestyle seems to make HIV exposure unlikely, you are still at risk for herpes, hepatitis, HPV, chlamydia, syphilis, and a host of other diseases. Kinsey’s statistics from back in the 1940s indicated that slightly more than half of relationships that are theoretically monogamous in fact involve sexual contact with outside partners. Get educated and take care of yourself.

Testing and Prevention

We think it’s essential for ethical sluts to be tested for HIV and other sexually transmitted diseases on a regular schedule. How frequently depends on the risk factors in your life. Ask your doctor, clinic, or Planned Parenthood office, and follow their advice.

One friend of ours, new to meeting other sluts online, was agreeably startled to discover that some prospective partners routinely brought their most recent test results to the first coffee date—perhaps a new definition of the “card-carrying polyamorist.”

While most STDs are preventable only with barriers and care, recently developed vaccinations can protect you against several potentially deadly forms of hepatitis and, if you aren’t already infected, human papilloma virus. If you engage in nonmonogamous anal or vaginal play, these are a _very_ good idea; they are expensive but cheaper than getting sick. Discuss them with your health care provider. You’ll still need barriers against all the rest of the microscopic nasties.

Birth Control

Mother Nature is called that for a reason—sometimes it seems like she wants everybody to be a parent. Even when you utterly _know_ that you don’t want to get pregnant this time, some deeper urge can easily lead you to forget a pill or count the days wrong. Birth control involves tricking the busy little eggs and sperm into not doing their jobs and tricking your own instincts into letting you do the trick right.

Birth control technology is, alas, far from perfect: reliable, reversible, easy, side-effect-free contraception is still a dream. Unwanted pregnancies need no longer be the life-shattering tragedies of yesteryear, but they are still awful, and we hope that none of you ever has to have one.

If you have ovaries and a uterus, have intercourse with people who have testicles, and could possibly be fertile, you must take active steps to ensure that you won’t get pregnant until and unless you choose to. The possibilities include birth-control pills, longer-term chemical birth control like Norplant and Depo-Provera, diaphragms and cervical caps, condoms, IUDs, sponges and foam, and tubal ligation, among others. Some women with regular menstrual cycles succeed at the rhythm method, particularly if they and their partners learn to enjoy outercourse during their fertile periods. There is a lot of good information available about the risks and reliability of all these methods; your physician, clinic, or Planned Parenthood can help you make a good choice.

For testicle-owners who have intercourse with uterus-owners, the choices are (unfortunately) quite limited. If you know you are unlikely to want to have children in the future, a vasectomy is minor surgery that will relieve you of a great deal of worry. If you hope to be a parent someday, use those condoms—and lobby for research into better male contraception.

When someone gets pregnant unintentionally, this can be, to put it mildly, difficult. If everyone involved agrees that an abortion is the best choice, that can be pretty unpleasant in and of itself; if there is disagreement, it can be shattering. Until such time as science enables everyone to carry fetuses in their bodies, we believe that the final decision has to belong to the person with the fetus inside, but we sympathize deeply with the person who would like to raise a baby and whose partner isn’t willing or able to carry it. We do think that both partners should share in the financial and emotional burden of an abortion or a pregnancy.

If one, both, or all partners are interested in being a parent, and someone is willing to carry the fetus to term, ethical sluthood opens up a wealth of options for parenting. Please don’t feel that the only way to be a parent is to get married and buy a house in the suburbs—perfectly marvelous children come out of shared parenting arrangements, intentional communities, group marriages, and a multitude of other ways to nurture and support a child.

Committing to Healthy Sex

You may notice that we have gone out of our way not to tell you what decisions to make about your sexual behavior. Only you can decide what risks feel acceptable to you, and we believe that letting anybody else make that decision for you virtually guarantees that you won’t follow through on your choices.

You must, however, _make_ choices. You must choose to do your homework and learn what you need to know about risks and rewards. You must choose to do the work of saying no to sex that doesn’t meet your own safety criteria and of being prepared to say yes to sex that does: discovering you’re out of condoms at the wrong moment is a recipe for disaster. You must choose to approach your sexual behaviors in a mature, realistic, and _sober_ manner—intoxication plays a role in a shockingly high percentage of HIV infections and unwanted pregnancies.

You must be prepared to share your sexual decision making and history with any potential partners you encounter. If consent is at the core of ethical sluthood—and it is—your partners must be able to give informed consent to whatever risks are involved in having sex with you. You, of course, have the right to expect that same honesty from them.

You won’t like talking about this stuff, especially not with a new lover. It’s depressing and scary, definitely not erotic, and sometimes horrendously embarrassing. Allow us to reassure you: the first time is the worst. Practice makes perfect, and after you’ve been over all these ugly and lethal possibilities a few times, you will become less sensitive and learn to deal with what you need to with ease and grace. Many people avoid the discussion on a first date by agreeing upon the safest possible practices for that encounter and then negotiating more specifically later on. If you know you have a risk condition, like active herpes, silence becomes less of an option; you need to invite your lovers to collaborate with you in avoiding infection, and they have a right to enough information to make their own choices.

On a cheerier note, getting good at talking about sex has some very nice rewards, once you get through blushing. Chatting about the fun stuff is a turn-on and the best way to get exactly what you want in the way of pleasure. Then you can learn what your partner gets excited about, which will make you the best of all possible lovers.

We, and most of the people we know, make fairly conservative choices about what health risks we take in our sexuality. We know from experience that it is quite possible to have exciting, satisfying, fabulously slutty sex without lying awake nights worrying afterward. And isn’t that the kind of sex we all want to have?
