14 CHILDREARING
============

If you’re raising kids today, you have it a little bit easier than sluts of yesteryear—images of families in books and television aren’t quite as limited to _Leave It to Beaver_ and _Ozzie and Harriet_ as they were in our childhoods. Still, even though divorce and single parenting are now acceptable topics, our culture is slow to catch up to the other realities of our lives: media images of multipartner relationships, and other nontraditional constellations are still rare.

Yet kids take to these relationships quite readily, perhaps more so than to the traditional nuclear family: children have grown up in villages and tribes for most of human history. Janet remembers having some of her first desires for group living during vacations with her then-husband’s expansive extended family, when she noticed that her kids, surrounded by loving adults with plenty of time on their hands, were happier, more docile, and less fragmented than she’d ever seen them. During her kids’ teen years, she lived in a group household and watched her sons adapt quite readily to the comings and goings of a disparate group of adults—one of whom was almost always free to answer a question, troubleshoot a computer program, experiment with a recipe, or play a game.

The single parent ethical slut can check out a number of creative options for maintaining a fulfilling sex life while being a responsible parent. When Dossie was sharing a house with two other single mothers, one of her lovers used to babysit all the kids so all three mothers had a chance to go out dancing together. A friend of ours used to babysit her younger sister and the kids next door so that her parents could fool around with the next-door neighbors. We have seen families of lovers whose kids become friendly “siblings,” learning from one another and all adults available to them, becoming what might look like a preindustrial small village or tribe.

The binary nature of monogamy-centrist thinking tends, we think, to cause problems: you’re either the love of my life or you’re out of here. Both of us have found that opening our lives to other kinds of connections also opens our children’s lives. Still, many parents have a great deal of difficulty bridging the gap between responsible parenting and inclusive relationships. Questions about what and how much to tell your kids, how to prepare them for difficult questions in the outside world, and how to help them relate to the new people who arrive and depart in their lives can be challenging for any parent.

We have never had problems creating consistency and security for our children in a sexually interconnected extended family. While you might assume that inclusive relationships might generate massive inconsistency, our experience is just the opposite. Our connections tend to form sprawling extended families that have plenty of energy to welcome all the children, and the children readily learn their way around the tribe.

Some shifts in the population are inevitable, but in our experience children take that kind of mobility for granted and perhaps develop a flexibility that might serve them well later in life. If we prepare them for a life where any change at all is seen as a disaster, how will they manage? Better, perhaps, to learn that loss may be difficult, but we do get through it, pick up the pieces, and go on with our lives. One way parents can offer consistency to children is to model healthy adaptation to change. Another good form of consistency is to be honest with yourself and with your children—when you live your life in integrity, everyone can count on you to be exactly who you, wonderfully, are.

Sex Education for Kids

As you’ve surmised, we think an abundance of relationships can be highly beneficial to family life and that children gain role models, attention, and support in the polyamorous extended family. Clearly, children should not be included in adult sexual behavior. Education, however, is not abuse, and children need enough information to make sense out of what the adults are doing so they can grow up to their own healthy understanding of sexuality.

All parents must make their own decisions about what kind of sexual information their children should have at any given age. For the health and well-being of the child, a balance must be struck between offering too much information, which might seem scary or overwhelming, and too little, which might leave the child with the message that naked bodies and sexual arousal are so dangerous and embarrassing that it’s not okay to even talk about them. We don’t want to terrify the kids, and we don’t want them to come into their own adult sexual lives with the belief that sex is dirty and shameful.

Remember, sex education is an issue for all parents, whatever their lifestyle. We want our kids to have good information and freedom of choice, and they are often living in neighborhoods and going to schools where many parents believe that kids should be denied all information about sex (or else they might turn out to be sluts like us).

To make matters more complicated, our culture currently is deeply divided about the entire subject of sex information and kids. Some people consider any form of sex education to be somehow dangerous. Some authorities feel that when children have “precocious” information about sex, it must mean that the child is being abused by an adult. We are, however, adamantly opposed to “abstinence-only” so-called sex education. How are we to teach our children to say no to an abusive adult if we are not frank about what it is that they should say no to? When we try to keep sex secret from our kids, they are aware that something is going on, but they don’t know what. And if we leave them to get their sex information from equally ill-informed kids or from online pornography, we consign them to the jungle. Our kids need and deserve adult support in learning about and negotiating sexuality, as they do in all other aspects of life.

There are countries in Europe where sex education in the schools for children of all ages is routine, including information on ways to make sure the sex is pleasurable. Films of such classes show confident, curious students, comfortable with the material—and these countries have extremely low rates of teen pregnancy.

What to Share, and Not

You’ll have to decide how much your kids should know about your sexual choices, such as multiple partners, same-sex partners, or alternative family structures. Our experience is that kids figure such things out quicker than you think they do but that they may not figure them out exactly right.

One word of warning: If you are living in a community that does not share your standards about sex education, your desire to educate needs to be balanced against the need for the child to learn what is and is not okay to share with the outside world. When you teach your kids, you will need to talk with them about how other people’s standards operate and about what information might be problematic to share.

There are still many places in this country where living a nontraditional sexual lifestyle is considered a justification for legally removing your children from your custody. Even when you are sure you are doing no harm, you still may need to protect your kids from puritanical neighbors, teachers, and other outsiders. We can’t give you concrete guidelines on this, because only you can know the atmosphere in your particular community and the personalities of your own children.

There are also, sadly, many places in this country where children who are “different” (differently gendered), perhaps with parents who are not the hetero couple that Hollywood recommends or who otherwise fail to fit in to the narrow narratives of traditional America, may be subject to soul-crushing bullying. Schools owe it to their students, both legally and ethically, to provide a safe space for learning. If your child or the child of someone you care about is being bullied, please speak up and make sure the school is fulfilling its legal obligation to protect people who are too young to take care of themselves.

What Should They See?

We think it’s a good idea to model physical and verbal affection for children; that’s how they learn to be affectionate adults. But you’ll have to make some decisions about the appropriate dividing line between physical affection and sexual demonstrativeness.

Do your kids get to see you hugging your partners, kissing them, touching them? These are all decisions we can’t make for you. You have to think them through yourself—taking into account such issues as their ages, their levels of sophistication, and their perceptions about your existing relationships—and abide by your own decisions.

Nudity is a gray area. We certainly don’t think kids are harmed by growing up in households where casual nudity is the norm. But children who have never been around nude adults may be upset if nudity is suddenly introduced into their living room. Kids can be very sensitive to issues like sexual display, and flashing is clearly a violation of boundaries. Certainly, if a child expresses discomfort with being around your or your friends’ nudity, their desires should be respected. And we hope it goes without saying that no child should ever be required to be nude in front of others—many children go through phases of extreme modesty as they struggle to cope with their changing bodies, and that, too, deserves scrupulous respect.

What Should They Do?

It is illegal and immoral to allow your kids to engage in any form of sexual behavior with any adult or to allow your partners to be sexual or seductive with your kids. Many children go through one or more sexually explorative and/or flirtatious periods in their lives—this is natural and common. But it’s important that you and your friends maintain especially good boundaries during such periods; learning polite and friendly ways of acknowledging a child’s changing needs without engaging sexually is a critical skill for ethical sluts who spend time around their own or their partners’ kids. The best way to teach your child good boundaries is to be clear about your own and to respect the child’s right to grow up free from violation.

Answering Their Questions

Kids’ questions about sex and relationships can often be challenging—from the five-year-old’s, “But how does the seed get _to_ the egg?” to the teenager’s, “So how come you get to fuck anyone you want, but I have to be home by midnight?” And today, when many kids come from small nuclear families with little exposure to older children, the job of sex education falls squarely on the shoulders of parents.

Here’s where the skills you’ve learned in other parts of this book can come in handy. You owe your kids honest, heartfelt responses to questions like these; this is not the time to come on all high-handed and parental. Particularly with older children and teenagers, it’s fine to let them know if you’re feeling ambivalent or embarrassed about something: they’ll know anyway, believe us. If a situation makes you angry or sad, share that, too. They may need some reassurance that your emotion isn’t their fault and some reinforcement that it’s not their job to help you feel better.

It’s also fine to test their willingness to receive information. Before you start heaping data on their heads, you can try prefacing your communication with a question like, “Do you want to know about \[whatever the topic is\]?” Janet remembers a conversation with her older son when he was about ten: she’d just done a “birds and bees” rap and had perhaps gotten a little carried away. At the end of her long speech, she asked him, “So, as long as we’re on this topic, is there anything else you want to know?” He replied, fervently, “Mom, you’ve already told me _much_ more than I wanted to know.”

Good boundaries are important, too. While your kids are certainly entitled to express an opinion about the way you choose to run your life, they don’t get to dictate it. The flip side of this is that you owe it to them to help prevent their lives from being unduly impacted by a lifestyle they never chose. So you may need to clear the sexy books off the coffee table when your kids’ friends are visiting, and take down your favorite erotic art. We hate to suggest that you hide _our_ book in the closet, but so it may need to be. Well, nobody ever said parenthood—especially slutty parenthood—was going to be easy.

“While your kids are certainly entitled to express an opinion about the way you choose to run your life, they don’t get to dictate it.”

Your Lovers’ Kids

When your lovers have kids, you are involved with those kids, too—one friend of ours refers to the many children he helped his lovers raise as his “practice kids,” helping him learn parenting skills for the child of his own that came along later.

You’ll need to make decisions together about what to tell the kids about your relationships, and you need to learn what decisions are conventional in your lovers’ families. It may not matter whether younger children know or understand that some of the connections in their families are sexual and others are not. But all adults in families with children have a responsibility to make a connection with the kids we come in contact with, and to foster our own children’s connections with our friends and lovers. Single sluts with no previous connection to children may find themselves in a position of needing to learn how to deal with children in their extended family.

Fact of life: Everyone around children will eventually need to set limits with them. There may be some challenges as you work to reconcile your own limits with the habits and styles of a family that was working just fine before you arrived in it. Expressing your needs can be an opportunity for the kids to learn that different adults have different needs, that Jane can nap through a rousing game of Inside Tag whereas Jean needs an hour of quiet.

It may be that you find yourself disliking one of your lover’s kids. Perhaps something about this particular child pushes your buttons: they may remind you of your horrible older brother or maybe even your young self. Or the child may be angry with you, or dislike you, for reasons entirely beyond your control: perhaps you are “replacing” a beloved parent or other adult who has been lost to death or divorce. Whatever the reason for this problem, you are the adult and it is your responsibility to find a way to solve it. Resolution will undoubtedly take some time, a fair amount of energy, and a great deal of patience, but we believe it will be worth it, for you and your lover and the kids.

Early in Janet’s relationship with her spouse E, there was a lot of friction between him and her young adult son, mostly over issues that will sound familiar to any stepparent: housekeeping, noise levels, courtesy. Then, she recalls, “We were visiting my mother for a few days, and the two of them were escaping the domestic whirlwind out in the back yard. E expressed sympathy about a difficult personal situation my son was encountering. They had a beer together and really talked, from the heart, for the first time—and suddenly E could see my son the way I see him, as a socially awkward young man, not always too aware of the physical realities around him but with a huge heart and a lot to give. From that evening on, they’ve had little trouble working together on normal household stuff and have in fact become good friends.”

When you establish a positive relationship with the children in your environment, they will respond by developing a positive relationship with you. We know of ex-lovers who have maintained close friendships over many decades with children with whom they had no biological relationship. Thus are slut families built and maintained.

Poly Pioneers: Marston, Marston, and Byrne

One of the concerns that outsiders often bring up about multipartner households is the inevitable, “But what about the children?” In your authors’ experience, children of multipartner households are at least as likely as kids raised in a nuclear family to be healthy and happy. One multipartner household produced not only four successful human children, but also a wildly successful imaginary “child”: Wonder Woman, the first female superhero.

William Moulton Marston was a Harvard graduate, author, and psychologist; he drew the connection between falsehood and blood pressure that underlay the creation of the lie detector. His wife Elizabeth “Sadie” Holloway Marston was an editor and administrator—in the parlance of the day, a “career woman.” Their partner Olive “Dotsie” Byrne, William’s former research assistant, took primary responsibility for raising the triad’s four children—two from Sadie and two from Dotsie—and caring for the household.

It was William who had the original idea of a superhero whose powers were based on love rather than violence, but it was Sadie who replied, “Fine, then make her a woman.” And Wonder Woman’s dark-haired, red-lipped appearance and forceful but nurturing personality seem to have been based to a significant degree on Dotsie—William remarked in an interview that Wonder Woman’s “amazonium” projectile-repelling bracelets were based on a silver pair that Dotsie often wore.

Any reader of the original 1940s “Wonder Woman” comics is aware of their strong kink component—we doubt they could have been published in a more erotically aware age. Besides the ongoing portrayal of bondage (of which Wonder Woman’s “lasso of truth” was only one example), themes of dominance and submission, flagellation, and even infantilism surfaced often. William spoke in interviews about bondage and submission as pathways to a better world. The comics also dealt with prescient questions of restorative justice and the tension between individualism and social health, in addition to raising money for polio awareness/prevention and other worthy causes.

Wonder Woman outlived her creator in name only. Incarnations of the heroine after William’s death in 1947 soft-pedaled her strength and feminism: by the end of the 1960s, she had surrendered her Amazonian powers and was running a boutique. (A 2010 relaunch reverted to something closer to the original heroine.) Sadie and Dotsie, though, lived together, in a household described by visitors as loving and cheerful, for the rest of their lives.
