19 MAKING CONNECTION
=================

Any member of a sexual minority faces special challenges in finding partners and friends—and, as a slut or slut-wannabe, you are most assuredly a member of a sexual minority. Polyamory is not readily understood or accepted in very many social environments. If you’re also gay, lesbian, bisexual, asexual, transgender, or interested in a specialized area of sexuality such as cross-dressing or BDSM, you are doubly or triply challenged. Making the connections of your dreams is not only possible but eminently achievable, as thousands of abundantly connected sluts can happily attest.

However, we’d be the last people to tell you that it will always be easy. We’ve heard, and lived, too many sad, frustrating stories about near misses: partners who are fine with an open relationship until someone falls in love, at which point they freak out and demand monogamy; or partners who rhapsodize about sexual openness and free love in principle but fall apart when faced with the reality. Some partners may become successfully polyamorous but come to a time when their needs, desires, and limits simply don’t fit together well enough.

Yet many people _do_ succeed in finding each other for relationships ranging from casual to lifetime. So, how do you find friends, lovers, and potential partners who not only share your values and beliefs, but are also emotionally, intellectually, and sexually compatible with you?

What?

A good place to start is by imagining what kind of relationship you want. Do you want someone with whom you can buy a house and raise a family, someone you can meet once a year for a hot and heavy weekend of role-playing fun, or Ms., Mr., or Mx. Right Now? Knowing what you want up front can prevent a lot of misunderstandings and hurt feelings later.

If you’re worried that nobody could possibly want what you have to offer, don’t be so sure. While it may be harder to find someone who wants to be a secondary partner or a role-play buddy or the parent of your children, it is certainly possible—in fact, there are undoubtedly at least a few people out there who are looking for just such a situation.

There are many, many ways to relate that lie between a one-night stand and a marriage. You may not know in advance what kind of relationship will develop with the person who intrigues you tonight, and that person may not fit whatever space in your life you thought you were looking to fill. Taking people as they come, how they are, and today, can lead you to wonderful surprises that more than make up for the occasional disappointment. So watch out for your preconceptions and be ready to approach new people with an open mind and an open heart.

“Taking people as they come can lead you to wonderful surprises that more than make up for the occasional disappointment.”

Expect situations to change. Someone you thought was just an occasional playmate may evolve into a much more important figure in your personal landscape. When this happens—and it has happened to both of us—it is important to keep that person, and anyone else involved, thoroughly briefed on the emotional shifts you’re experiencing. It may be that your friend is feeling the same way toward you…and this could be the beginning of a beautiful friendship. Or the object of your desire may not be in a place where a deep emotional commitment feels right. In any case, treat this changed relationship as though it were a new one—in a way, it is. It may be that the two of you can go on connecting in your original, casual manner, or you may have to part for a while to rediscover your original equilibrium. Mindfulness, lots of empathy, and plenty of honest communication are strongly recommended. It can help to spend some time remembering what was hot and wonderful, and then prepare to make room for a new relationship—possibly with the same person.

Who?

Next, begin thinking about _who_ you’re looking for. The trick in making this decision is to be neither too specific nor too vague. If your “who” list basically includes anybody who is breathing and who is willing to have sex with you, you are perhaps broadening your field a bit too much. Even if you don’t have strong preferences about gender, age, appearance, background, or intelligence, you probably do want someone who will not lie to you, steal from you, hurt you, or exploit you: basic sanity, honesty, and respectfulness are on most of our lists. It is also perfectly fine to acknowledge those preferences that are genuinely important to you: if you prefer men to women or people your own age to people much older or younger, nobody is going to report you to the Equal Opportunity Commission.

On the other hand, if your “who” list reads like a set of technical specifications—gender, age, weight, height, coloring, mode of dress, educational background, breast size, penis size, sexual kinks—we suspect that you may be more interested in making love to your own fantasy than you are to a real live person. Many of us are conditioned to react sexually to a rather unrealistic standard of appearance and behavior: porn queens and kings are fun to watch in the movies, but they rarely appear in our living rooms. If you expect your new honey to be gorgeous, intelligent, loving, and highly sexual all the time, you are almost certainly setting yourself up for a lifetime of disappointment—few people can achieve those standards, and nobody can maintain them twenty-four hours a day.

We can’t tell you the exact cutoff point at which a healthy preference becomes an unrealistic desire; only you can look inside yourself to do that. We do think that physical appearance, wealth, and social status have very little to do with the person behind them, and if any of those criteria appear high up on your “who” list, you may be a little bit stuck in your fantasy. Try getting to know some people who _don’t_ meet those criteria. We have a hunch that if you get to know them and like them, you will discover that they have their own unique beauties just waiting there for someone to notice them.

EXERCISE: THE AIRPORT GAME

Next time you find yourself in a public place like an airport or mall, find a place to sit where you can look at people without drawing attention to yourself. Then, for each person you look at, imagine—what might be this person’s lover’s favorite thing about them? Do they have a strong stride, a sweet smile, bright eyes, powerful shoulders, hair that looks soft to the touch? Pretty much everybody is, or has been, loved by someone—see whether you can see what makes this particular person lovable and lustworthy, even if they’re not the kind of person you’re used to seeing that way.

An important note: even people who _are_ gorgeous or rich or busty or whatever don’t usually like to feel that their beauty, their wallet, or their breasts are their most attractive quality. Those who partner successfully with them often consider such qualities a happy bonus that has little or nothing to do with why they chose that person in the first place.

Where?

Where do sluts gather? What are your best-bet venues for finding the bedmate, playmate, or lifemate of your dreams?

In the two decades since we first wrote this book, the answer to that question has changed a great deal. _Polyamory_ is now listed in the _Oxford English Dictionary_. Newspapers, magazines, and websites worldwide have run detailed articles describing this strange new lifestyle. Support groups have sprung up in all major U.S. cities and many smaller ones; several larger annual conferences draw connection-minded sluts from all over the world.

It is impossible to list the wide variety of polyamory-related venues that are available to you, because there are too many and they change too fast, but your search engine is your friend: useful search terms may include _polyamory_, _open relationships_, _swinging_, _ethical slut_, _nonmonogamy_, and/or _alternative relationships_, along with whatever specialized terms (such as location, gender, and sexual orientation) might help you sort out the websites that will be most useful to you. One small caveat: there are almost as many definitions of most of these words as there are people using them. You may find yourself confronting people who insist that whatever you’re doing (swinging, **fuck-buddy** circles, casual play, group sex, whatever) isn’t really what you think it is: the most conservative definition of polyamory, for example, encompasses only long-term committed multipartner relationships. In this, as in so many other things, a great question to ask is, “What exactly do you mean by that?”

If, for whatever reason, the online communities don’t feel like the right place for your quest, there are many options for seeking out other sluts in person. It is difficult to find sluts in dance clubs—the music is often too loud for an exchange of ideas or ambitions. Try searching the Web for “ethical slut” and “polyamory” with “munch” and “meetup,” along with the name of your area, and meet some people who like to get together and talk about the lifestyle. We find a lot of ethical sluts exploring alternative realities: try your local Society for Creative Anachronism and other historical reenactment groups, and know that many Renaissance Faires are practically sluts’ trade conferences. Check out science fiction conventions or live-action role-playing game groups. If your sluttery has a spiritual leaning, many groups of neopagans are far more open than traditional Judeo-Christian religions to alternative lifestyles. (Many others aren’t, so don’t make any untoward assumptions.) Atheist and skeptic groups also include more than their share of people interested in exploring sluttery.

Another good place to look can be in workshops, seminars, and gatherings that have to do with human sexuality or intimacy. While cruising is, understandably, not allowed at some of these activities (people baring their souls are doing difficult work that can be disturbed by having to be on guard against unwanted advances), graduates often go on meeting socially long after the actual session is over. Several regional and national conferences about sexuality and intimacy are attended by many kindred slutty spirits.

When you go to events where you can expect to meet like-minded folk, you will usually need to invest a little time in becoming a member of the group you are visiting. Start out by making friends, and don’t be friendly only to people you want to pursue. Make as many friends as you can, and people will start to trust you. One good initial tactic is to go find some people like yourself, not your ideal opposite number, and make friends with them: they probably know people you will like.

Most of these gathering places and events are made possible by a lot of hard-working volunteers, so the absolute best way to get to know people in a group you like is to volunteer to do something useful: greet folks at the door, help with refreshments, join the clean-up crew. You will meet a ton of people, and they will be grateful to you. Both of your authors have become valued members of many communities by helping out and by offering our living rooms as meeting places to support groups and social functions (and then we don’t even have to leave home to attend).

Personal Ads

Sluts have been finding each other through personal ads for decades, and personal-ad partner finding has expanded enormously in the last decade or two, fueled by the widespread availability of Internet access.

A search on “polyamory personal ads,” perhaps with the name of your city or state, turns up websites that host poly and alternative personal ads for people of all genders and orientations. Another free option is a couple of online social media sites targeted to people who share a particular sexual interest, such as BDSM. Not only do these sites typically offer personal ads (often sorted by location), but they also host special interest groups where you can get to know people who share your particular interests and kinks. Many such groups collaborate on occasional in-person meetups as well.

You can also download apps for your mobile device that enable you to find like-minded people in your area. Some of these are used primarily for immediate hookups, while others are likelier to produce people interested in longer-term connections: we suggest you find out which one any particular app is for, if you hope to avoid uncomfortable misunderstandings.

Some sites specialize in matchmaking. These typically cost money and are primarily targeted to those seeking long-term relationships; some specialize in particular religious orientations, professional statuses, racial categories, ages, or personal lifestyles. At this time, many of these services do not support nonmonogamous lifestyles, and some will even take down ads that mention poly, but we hope that will change as polyfolk become more visible.

PLACING AN AD

Many people find the experience of creating a profile, a page, or a personal ad on social media to be quite difficult, requiring a degree of self-examination and self-marketing that feels acutely uncomfortable. After all, hardly anyone likes to think of themselves as a product to be marketed—yet, when you compose an ad, that’s exactly what you’re doing. One of your authors, a former advertising copywriter, has a few suggestions that may make it a bit less painful.

Do you want to bring in as many qualified people as possible or just a few? Your answer to this question will dictate some of your ad-writing strategies. If you are young, cisgender, hetero or bi, thin, female, and healthy, an ad that casts a wide net will draw more responses than you can possibly answer, so a better strategy might be to “narrowcast”—to include information about yourself that will enable inappropriate responders to look elsewhere. (You’ll still get plenty of inappropriate responses, but you’ll be able to sort them out because of all the negatives in your ad that they’ve conveniently overlooked. Janet ran personal ads for a while that described her as middle-aged, plump, bisexual, butch, partnered, and a BDSM top, and still got dozens of responses from guys who clearly had seen only that she was female and willing.)

On the other hand, if you fall into a category that puts you in less demand—which is, let’s face it, most of us—then you’ll have to decide for yourself how widely to cast your net. If you know yourself to be charming, easy to get along with, open-minded, and smart, then perhaps your reader doesn’t need to know right this second that you’re carrying a few more pounds than you’d prefer or that a health condition sometimes prevents you from having as much fun as you’d wish. (It is, however, conventional to mention up front if you’re already in a relationship in which your beloveds have some say in how you arrange your romantic life.)

Do you want to include a photo? Ads with photos draw more responses than those without, so your strategy will dictate the answer to that question. Many people prefer to choose a photo that is not immediately recognizable, for privacy reasons; a face turned mostly away from the camera or partly in shadow is a compromise. Please make sure the photo is recent and a good likeness—after all, you’re hoping to meet at least one of your readers face to face at some point, and you don’t want to start a potential new relationship with someone feeling misled. We do not recommend using photos of your sexual parts unless you are looking only for quickie hookups, and even then, many readers find them offensive.

One advantage over the old days of personal ads in magazines and newspapers is that you can fine-tune your ad online if it isn’t working the way you’d wish. If you’re getting swamped with unqualified responses, put in a few of your quirks and flaws. If you’re not getting enough responses, take a few out.

Still stuck? Ask a close friend—or, better yet, an ex with whom you’re on good terms—for help. Maybe you can write an ad for them, and they can write one for you. You may not end up using exactly the ad they wrote, but it can be a great aid in figuring out what your closest friends love about you, which is probably what the new lover you’ll someday meet will love about you, too.

“One advantage over the old days is that you can fine-tune your ad if it isn’t working the way you’d wish.”

Whatever you choose, we advise you to be yourself—so that you can meet someone who is interested in you, exactly how you are. The consequences of overly enthusiastic advertising include waking up in the morning with someone who is crazy about a person who is not you. This won’t do you any good at all.

WHAT HAPPENS NEXT?

When you meet people through a personal ad, it is customary to get to know them in stages, starting with email correspondence, then perhaps a phone conversation, and then a no-strings get-together in a public place for coffee or a meal so that you can get to know the other person slowly and with as little pressure as possible. Be aware that you know nothing about this person beyond words on a screen, so take the same precautions you would take in meeting any other stranger.

A special case: What if you fall in love with a person who wants monogamy? This situation is going to be tough. We know that this is a valid disagreement, and also a very basic difference. In our more thoughtless moments, we have blithely assumed that once this delightful person who has won our heart discovers that ethical sluttery is possible, they will instantly want to join in—but that is not always the case. Please remember that nobody is right and nobody is wrong; this is about two different ways of structuring a relationship, and both, or all, choices are valid. You may choose for the present to continue exploring this relationship because it is precious to you and you want to see how things evolve, even if you may be disappointed at some time in the future. Both of you need to agree to tolerate the ambiguity of knowing that you want something different. Entering into a relationship while planning to change your partner is not respectful to your beloved and could make big trouble later on.

Make “for the time being” agreements about how you will live at present, and seek out knowledge and experience that will help you understand each other’s positions. Read this book together; read a good book on intimacy. Refrain from bad-mouthing each other’s choices. Attend some workshops together—maybe one on poly and one on hot monogamy. Join some online support groups on relevant topics, and find time to discuss what you learn from all of these sources.

Consider the wide spectrum of relationship options available to you—perhaps the one that best fits your needs may not be what you thought you were looking for. Meanwhile, we feel sure that you entered into this potentially difficult situation because there is a great deal that you treasure in this particular relationship and that the value of your love together outweighs the differences between you. Whether you wind up as friends, lovers, spouses, or something else that’s unique to your pairing, we hope you’ll find a way to keep on cherishing that love.
