# 21 THE SINGLE SLUT

To live single is unusual in most cultures. Most people look on their times of singlehood as temporary, often accidental, and to be ended as quickly as possible. You are recovering from your last relationship, mourning a breakup, or too busy working on a career to handle hunting for romance. Perhaps there aren’t any good candidates around right now. Something better will surely come along soon…so you wait, not even thinking of making a lifestyle out of how you are living today.

What would it be like to be _intentionally_ single, to choose for some period of time to live by yourself? Potential partners can pop up when you least expect them—and in a culture that is built in twos, any relationship that has any life in it is regarded as an escalator to couplehood. How, then, to stay single?

What would your social support network look like? Might it be possible to get your needs met and feel loved and secure through a community of friends, lovers, family, mentors—your personal human resources?

Building your network by yourself can be hard at first—no one but you to make the phone calls, schedule dates for lunch or the movies, stay connected. It’s up to you to build yourself a family and to take care of yourself gently with an open heart.

Your relationship with yourself is a lifelong commitment. When you are single, you have unique opportunities to deepen that relationship with yourself, to find out who you are, and to celebrate your journey in whatever relationships you may move through as you travel through your life. To live single and in love with many is a voyage of self-discovery, an opportunity to get to know yourself intimately and to work on any changes you want to make in your life. Dossie was single when she first struggled with her jealousy, and having it all to herself made it easier to see inside herself rather than blame someone else and to make conscious decisions about how she wanted to deal with her feelings.

Being single over being partnered is not an either/or choice. But our culture tends to discount singlehood as a lifestyle, and thus very few people choose to remain single, which means there are limited resources and little social status available to the single person. Perhaps if being single were an acceptable, even valued, lifestyle, partnerships might develop more out of choice and less out of a sense of necessity or a desperate grab for salvation.

Partnered people get to share the basics of their lives—working together on shared goals, pooling finances, splitting the hard work of childrearing. Partners also get to share with each other when things are less than pretty—and we all need somebody to let us know that we are still lovable when we are not at our shiniest. The challenge for the single slut is to find ways to deepen the intimacy in relationships that may not be life partnerships.

Being single offers the opportunity to spend time being purely who you are. Singles enjoy more freedom to explore, fewer obligations, and the ability to lounge around the house in a holey T-shirt, playing video games, with nobody the wiser.

> “Being single offers the opportunity to spend time being purely who you are.”

Perhaps you are single for negative, and valid, reasons. The last relationship was a disaster, and you are terrified to try again. You only feel safe controlling your own finances or your own kitchen or your own life. The only way you know how to be in a relationship is to try to be the perfect wife or husband or lover or provider, and you’re exhausted from trying to be someone you are not. You are recovering from a breakup; you want to avoid rebound romance; you need time to grieve. You just haven’t found anyone that you really want to live with.

Perhaps you are actively choosing to live single at this time in your life. Living alone leaves you free to explore any kind of relationship that crosses your path. You can love someone who wouldn’t make a good partner. You can love someone who already has a partner and who doesn’t need you to help with the mortgage or taking the kids to the orthodontist. You might choose singlehood because you love the joy of the hunt, the magic of flirtation, all the mystery and excitement of newness. Or you might want to explore how to develop sexual connections with people you like but do not love, or to learn to love without possessiveness, or to explore any of the innumerable relationships that are possible without coupling. Each utterly unique person you meet offers a new mirror in which you can see a new view of yourself: each new lover increases your knowledge of the world and your self-knowledge as well.

## The Ethics of the Single Slut

What are the rights and responsibilities of the single sexual partner? Start with rights: you have them, and you will need to assert them. Too often our culture sees the single partner as “secondary,” “outside,” “an affair,” a “home wrecker,” and your place in the ecology of any life or relationship or community is dismissed as inconsequential at best. What does a single person have to do to get taken seriously in this community or any other? If you’re in this position, a good place to start thinking about rights and responsibilities would be with some respect, honor, and consideration for each person’s feelings—including your own.

### THE RIGHTS OF THE SINGLE SLUT

• You have the right to be treated with respect—you are not half a person just because you are single.

• You have the right to have your feelings heard, respected, and responded to.

• You have the right to ask for anything you want—the person you ask may not give it to you, but you are definitely allowed to ask.

• You have the right to have dates and plans honored, not changed by a third party simply because that person has seniority.

• You have the right to chicken soup when you are sick and whatever other emergency support you may need—rides to the emergency room, help when your car breaks down. Your lovers are your friends, and friends help each other when things go wrong.

• You have the right to negotiate family holidays like Thanksgiving and weekends involving your own and your lovers’ children: you are a member of any family you are in a relationship with. How this works may look different depending on the values of the family you’re connecting to, but you have the right to ask for more than just being somebody’s dirty little secret.

• You have the right to have and set limits: what you will and will not do, what is and is not negotiable for your emotional well-being and personal ecology.

• You have the right to not be blamed for problems in other people’s relationships.

• You have the right to refuse to be a dumping ground for someone’s marital woes—you may not want to listen to how much your lover wants a divorce and you shouldn’t have to.

• You have the right to count. Everybody counts, including you.

• You have the right to be valued, welcomed, and respected as the wonderful human being that you are.

### THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE SINGLE SLUT

• You are responsible for developing and maintaining good solid boundaries. Boundaries are how you can tell where you end and the next person begins: good boundaries are strong, clear, and flexible; bad boundaries are weak, foggy, and brittle.

• You are responsible for making clear agreements. Make and keep agreements about time, about public and private behavior, and about courtesies in shared spaces.

• You are responsible for being clear when what you want to say is no. Don’t waffle and don’t make promises you can’t or won’t keep.

• You are responsible for choosing who you confide in about your relationships. Gossip can be a destructive force, and yet most of us need to be able to talk out our stuff with someone. Be clear about who those people are.

• You are responsible for respecting the other relationships of your lovers, especially their life partners, and for treating these people with respect, empathy, and openheartedness.

• You are responsible for safer sex: opening discussion with potential partners, making your own decisions about your level of acceptable risk, respecting other people’s decisions, and learning to be adept with little bits of essential rubber.

• You are responsible for owning your feelings. Learn to handle your own crises and get support from others who are free to be there for you at that particular time.

• You are responsible for being straightforward about your intentions. When you practice being openly affectionate with your lovers, they may expect more from you than you are offering, and you must be willing to speak out and make yourself and your desires clear to all concerned.

• You are responsible for finding ways to say what another person might not want to hear. Single sluts may need to state uncomfortable truths in relationships that might not have the customary intimacy for such vulnerable discussions.

• You are responsible for promoting intimacy in all your relationships. If being single means that you are committed to being coolly invulnerable in all situations, you’ll be living in a cold and distant world.

• You are responsible for valuing and welcoming all your lovers as the wonderful, brilliant, unique human beings that they surely are.

## Rainbow of Connections

If you’re single and slutty, you may find yourself interacting with a lot of different people in a lot of different patterns. Here are a few that we’ve encountered and that you may, too.

### SINGLES WITH SINGLES

Isn’t it funny how we call single people “available”? Available for what? When you are single, your lovers might be other singles, but that doesn’t mean that each of those relationships is anything like any other.

With any individual, you might be dating frequently, regularly, irregularly, or rarely. Quantity doesn’t always equal quality. When everyone is single and no one is auditioning for partners, then each relationship is free to seek its own level, and there may be fewer obstacles to flowing into exactly the relationship that fits for the two of you.

Just because you are single and not planning on changing that right now, please don’t take your lovers for granted. Let them know how precious and valuable they are to you. Convention says we should be more reserved: we say let’s change that convention. We love hot dates, and we also love warmth.

### PARTNER TO A PARTNER

You may be dating someone who has a long-term, life-sharing partner—married or living together. When you are dating that person, someone else’s feelings must be taken into account.

Perhaps you find yourself in the position of sleeping with someone who’s cheating. Whatever you think about the ethics involved—different sluts make different choices on this one—it is certain that difficulties can arise when your lover’s partner doesn’t know about your connection. Contortions may be required to keep the partner from finding out—and even with all the cleverness and forethought in the world, there is no sure way to keep such a big secret forever. This kind of secrecy can impose severe limits: if the relationship consists of weekly trysts at the no-tell motel, how much connection can really take place? If the relationship goes well, someone may very well wind up wanting more. It’s the “outside” lover in a secret affair who will most likely get abandoned if anybody gets caught.

Perhaps your sweetie is in a “don’t ask, don’t tell” agreement; many couples new to nonmonogamy try this one in an attempt to feel safer. In our experience, this sometimes creates problems for all concerned. First, many people find their lovers in their social networks, so keeping them all separate can be difficult or impossible. Or lies must be told to protect the agreement—and then it’s back to the cheating paradigm we just discussed. Maintaining untruths, even when you’re asked to do so, may create distance in any relationship and can be particularly damaging to live-in partnerships, where secrets are a lot harder to keep.

On the other hand, things are often simpler when everybody is informed about your involvement. Even if it starts out uneasily, being out of the closet offers the possibility of working toward learning to be more comfortable. If your lover is part of an experienced poly couple or family, everyone involved will know their boundaries and be able to let you know what their limits are, which can make for a lot more clarity. If they’re new to this kind of relating, good faith and a willingness to talk through problems can get you through most difficulties.

Your authors have found that we are happiest when everybody knows and acknowledges everybody. Common courtesy is essential, as is scrupulous avoidance of anything that smacks of competition or one-upmanship. Catfights are only fun in porn.

Both of us much prefer to meet our partners’ partners and make friends with them when at all possible. Sometimes they are not entirely sure that they want to be friends with us, and occasionally they’re pretty sure they’d rather not, but with patience and goodwill, most of them come around. After all, we have at least one thing in common: we both love the same person.

There is no reason why our interests need be opposed to our lover’s partners’ interests. We all want to collaborate on creating a happy outcome where everybody gets respected and everybody gets their needs met and their desires fulfilled. In the long run, we are all on the same side.

The experienced slut can take some initiative in reaching out to frightened partners in a gentle and openhearted way. The vulnerability of feeling jealous or nervous about each other is its own form of intimacy, and friendly feelings may be the most useful response.

> “We are all on the same side.”

Taking care of a partner’s partner by sharing sex with them is optional for both of you. It’s rarely a good idea to get intimate with someone just because they might feel left out. Occasionally, you will discover a sweet fit and become lover to a couple, as we will discuss soon. But avoid committing yourself to an interaction that you don’t like very much or don’t want at all. Agreeing to sex you don’t want to assuage jealousy almost never makes the jealousy go away. You can respect your own limits while offering support, warmth, and welcome to your lover’s lover.

A special case: you may find yourself in a relationship with someone whose life partnership is no longer very sexual, whether from the normal cooling of passion as relationships mature or through illness or disability. When you are dating such a person, do remember to approach their partner with an added measure of care and respect. Such people may be happy that you are keeping their partner happy but still somewhat sorrowful at not being able to fulfill that role themselves. It helps to recognize and honor the valuable contributions that person _does_ make.

### ROLE-CONSTRAINED RELATIONSHIPS

Sometimes your relationship may be defined by the roles you play together, roles that a person’s other partners may not want or enjoy. Your connection could be as simple as a love of watching football on TV or, perhaps more complicated, being the same-sex partner to someone in an opposite-sex marriage. Your shared roles might be about BDSM, erotic role-playing, exploration of gender, spiritual journeying, or any other sharing that the partnership doesn’t provide. Your shared role makes you part of a family’s ecology, part of what makes it run smoothly, and is both a joy and a responsibility not to be taken lightly.

### LOVER TO A COUPLE

Sometimes sexual connection comes together quite beautifully between multiple people—a threesome, a quad, or whatever. If you are fortunate enough to have this experience, you can expect to honor the relationship that you are privileged to share in and to be honored as a very special member of that relationship. The sex can be very luxurious—think of what can be done with those extra pairs of hands!—and feature various configurations of two on one or two on two or three on one or….How delicious to have multiple people spoiling you, how fascinating to share the active lovemaking with others, a virtuoso symphony when you get practiced at it.

There may be times when someone has little to do and could feel left out. When that happens to you, think about how an extra pair of hands might be useful in whatever the others are doing and gently join in. One time, in such a moment, Dossie was temporarily left out while the couple who were her lovers were having intercourse with each other. She felt a little shy, thought about joining in, and then noticed that these two people, who had been together for quite a few years, were amazingly graceful in their deep connection with each other, so Dossie settled in to watch for a while and was quite content just to witness such beauty. When they were through, they welcomed Dossie into their embrace, and further delights occurred that were well worth waiting for.

You can, if you choose, get to be all about fun and leave the heavy stuff to the partners who will go home with one another afterward. Or maybe you’d rather be there to help out when the kids all come down with chickenpox. Do remember that there is privilege in being an outside partner: as one friend of ours puts it, “I get to be dessert!”

### GROUPS

When your lover has a whole bunch of partners, making agreements can look like major treaty negotiations. Perhaps the other members want to meet and approve—that’s an easy one. Some will want outside partners to clearly understand the group’s limits and boundaries, especially about safer sex, which is great. We are very happy to see that some poly groups are very thoughtful about how they make connection to a new person and are willing to take the time to get things right.

Some groups might want you to join in one way or another—having sex with the group, moving in with the group, becoming part of a group marriage—that may or may not fit for you. You, of course, get to look at what’s being asked and decide whether that is what you want, and to define your own desires and limits.

Many initial disagreements can eventually be negotiated if all the parties involved are open-minded and operating in good faith. And if they aren’t, you might be better off learning that right at the start. One friend of ours connected with a person who had two primary partners and wanted our friend as a secondary. But when our friend asked what would happen if they were to acquire a primary partner, the new friends said, “Oh, no, that wouldn’t be acceptable.” So our friend opted out.

Most group marriages and circles we have encountered are much more lightly held and flow easily with new partners who may someday join the group at large, over time, and one step at a time. Dossie belonged to one such family when her daughter was a baby. There were no formal membership requirements, and everyone fit together and grew together as they went along, with partnerships forming and separating and reforming on their own timetables, and everyone responsible for the whole gang of children. This adaptive arrangement worked very well for quite a few years—not forever, but for a good, happy, memorable long time.

## Single Soliloquy

Dossie writes:

> Someone at a workshop once asked me: “Don’t you get lonely, living alone?” It took me a second to understand that he wasn’t trying to make me feel bad. What an ache he innocently opened in me. I had to say: “Yes, of course I get lonely.” And yet…
> 
> I have lived about half my adult life single. Some things are hard to do by yourself. I bought my first house a few years ago. How I yearned for a partner! But I managed, somehow. I dealt with my fears, as well as with realtors and mortgage brokers and roofers and inspectors, and now I have a sweet little home in the woods: like me, it is mine to share with others when and how I choose.
> 
> Someone asked me if I feared being alone in my old age. I am now in my seventies, and you bet I’m afraid of that. I do have a role model—my mother outlived my father by almost thirty years.
> 
> Nothing lasts forever. I still crave the thrill of falling in love, the dream of a romance so magical it could never fade. And I know better. But I am a person who prefers burning passion to sweet reason, and I don’t consider myself very good at compromise. My compromise for my own survival is to learn to live single and to make a very good life of it: a lifelong commitment to myself.
> 
> In 1969, when I was first a slut on purpose and a baby feminist, I decided to live single for five years so I could discover who I might be when I’m not trying to be somebody’s wife. But how was I going to make that work? I didn’t want to live and raise my child in a cold world with no affection or intimacy, so I devised a scheme for sharing love with lovers I had no intention of living with.
> 
> I invented ways that I could take the risky steps of sharing affection openly with people I had not “secured,” if I can call it that. I told them what I liked about them. I good-mouthed. I sought out opportunities to be demonstrative. I insisted on calling the feelings I had for each of my lovers by their true name: love. And when I had the courage to be loving, the result was that I got a lot of love back. Sharing an open affection for who and what I love around me has become the foundation of my way of life, whether or not I am living with a partner.
> 
> I am confident that this approach can work for everyone, whatever their lifestyle: wouldn’t it be a fine world if we all made it a point to honor and cherish and openly value every person we make a connection with?
> 
> I live in the country, and I feel this same kind of heart-opening love when I walk on a beach or look at the world from the top of a small mountain or discover, around some bend in a trail, a two-thousand-year-old tree standing in majesty. I feel no desperation, nor any desire to cling. I just feel happy.
> 
> Do I sometimes feel lonely? Sure. Do I love my life? Immensely. Sometimes I think I am the luckiest person in the world.
